4 General

4.1 Overview

The non-access stratum (NAS) described in the present document forms the highest stratum of the control plane between UE and AMF (reference point "N1" see 3GPPTS23.501[8]) for both 3GPP and non-3GPP access.

Main functions of the protocols that are part of the NAS are:

- support of mobility of the user equipment (UE) including also common procedures such as authentication, identification, generic UE configuration update and security mode control procedures;

- support of session management procedures to establish and maintain data connectivity between the UE and the data network; and

- NAS transport procedure to provide a transport of SMS, LPP, LCS, UE policy container, SOR transparent container and UE parameters update information payload.

Principles for the handing of 5GS security contexts and for the activation of ciphering and integrity protection, when a NAS signalling connection is established, are provided in subclause4.4.

For the support of the above functions, the following procedures are supplied within this specification:

- elementary procedures for 5GS mobility management in clause5; and

- elementary procedures for 5GS session management in clause6.

Signalling procedures for the control of NAS security are described as part of the 5GMM common procedures in subclause5.4.

Complete NAS transactions consist of specific sequences of elementary procedures. Examples of such specific sequences can be found in 3GPPTS23.502[9].

The NAS for 5GS follows the protocol architecture model for layer3 as described in 3GPPTS24.007[11].

4.2 Coordination between the protocols for 5GS mobility management and 5GS session management

A 5GS session management (5GSM) message is piggybacked in specific 5GS mobility management (5GMM) transport messages. To this purpose, the 5GSM messages can be transmitted in an information element in the 5GMM transport messages. In this case, the UE, the AMF and the SMF execute the 5GMM procedure and the 5GSM procedure in parallel. The success of the 5GMM procedure is not dependent on the success of the piggybacked 5GSM procedure.

The UE can only initiate the 5GSM procedure when there is a 5GMM context established at the UE.

During 5GMM procedures, the UE and the AMF shall suspend the transmission of 5GSM messages, except when:

a) the 5GMM procedure is piggybacking 5GSM messages; or

b) the UE is in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode and a service request procedure for re-establishing user-plane resources of PDU session(s) is initiated without including PDU session status IE or Allowed PDU session status IE. In this case, the UE and the AMF need not suspend the transmission of 5GSM messages related to other PDU session(s) than the one(s) for which the user- plane resources re-establishment is requested.

If the UE determines to locally release the N1 NAS signalling connection upon receiving an SOR transparent container during a registration procedure as specified in 3GPP TS 23.122 [5] Annex C.2, the UE shall suspend the transmission of 5GSM messages after sending the REGISTRATION COMPLETE message and until the N1 NAS signalling connection is released to obtain service on a higher priority PLMN, with the exception of the case when the UE has an emergency PDU session.

A 5GMM message piggybacking a 5GSM message for a PDU session shall be delivered via the access associated with the PDU session, if any, with the following exceptions:

a) the AMF shall send, via 3GPP access, a DL NAS TRANSPORT message piggybacking a downlink 5GSM message of a network-requested 5GSM procedure for a PDU session associated with non-3GPP access if the conditions specified in subclause5.5.1.3.4 or subclause5.6.1.4 are met;

b) the UE shall send an UL NAS TRANSPORT message piggybacking a response message to the 5GSM message described in a) via either:

1) 3GPP access; or

2) non-3GPP access if the UE is in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode over non-3GPP access; and

NOTE: The interaction between the 5GMM sublayer and the 5GSM sublayer to enable the UE to send the UL NAS TRANSPORT message containing the response message via 3GPP access is required. This is achieved via UE implementation.

c) the UE shall send, via the target access, an UL NAS TRANSPORT message piggybacking a 5GSM message associated with a request type set to "existing PDU session" or "existing emergency PDU session" for handover of an existing PDU session between 3GPP access and non-3GPP access.

A 5GMM message piggybacking a 5GSM message as a response message to a request message associated with an MA PDU session, shall be delivered via the same access that the initial message was received.

4.3 UE domain selection

4.3.1 UE's usage setting

The UE's usage setting defined in 3GPPTS24.301[15] applies to voice capable UEs in 5GS and indicates whether the UE has preference for voice services over data services or vice-versa, where:

a) voice services include IMS voice; and

b) data services include any kind of user data transfer without a voice media component.

The UE's usage setting can be set to:

a) "voice centric"; or

b) "data centric".

 If the UE is capable of S1 mode, there is a single UE's usage setting at the UE which applies to both 5GS and EPS.

4.3.2 Domain selection for UE originating sessions / calls

The behaviour of the UE for domain selection is determined by:

a) the UE usage setting;

b) the availability of IMS voice; and

c) whether the UE operates in single-registration mode or dual-registration mode (see 3GPPTS23.501[8]).

In the present document the condition "the UE supports IMS voice over 3GPP access" evaluates to "true" if at least one of the following is fulfilled:

1) the UE supports IMS voice over NR connected to 5GCN;

2) the UE supports IMS voice over E-UTRA connected to 5GCN; or

3) the UE supports IMS voice in EPS.

In the present document the condition "the UE does not support IMS voice over 3GPP access" evaluates to "true" if the condition "the UE supports IMS voice over 3GPP access" evaluates to "false".

In the present document the condition "the UE supports IMS voice over non-3GPP access" evaluates to "true" if the UE supports IMS voice over non-3GPP access connected to 5GCN.

In the present document the condition "the UE does not support IMS voice over non-3GPP access" evaluates to "true" if the condition "the UE supports IMS voice over non-3GPP access" evaluates to "false".

In the present document, "IMS voice not available" is determined per access type independently, i.e. 3GPP access or non-3GPP access.

In the present document, "IMS voice not available" refers to one of the following conditions:

a) the UE does not support IMS voice;

b) the UE supports IMS voice, but the network indicates in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message that IMS voice over PS sessions are not supported; or

c) the UE supports IMS voice, the network indicates in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message that IMS voice over PS sessions are supported, but the upper layers:

1) provide no indication that the UE is available for voice call in the IMS within a manufacturer determined period of time; or

2) indicate that the UE is not available for voice calls in the IMS.

NOTE1: If conditionsa and b evaluate to false, the upper layers need time to attempt IMS registration. In the event an indication from the upper layers that the UE is available for voice calls in the IMS takes longer than the manufacturer determined period of time (e.g. due to delay when attempting IMS registration or due to delay in obtaining a QoS flow for SIP signalling), the NAS layer assumes the UE is not available for voice calls in the IMS.

Other conditions may exist but these are implementation specific.

In the present document, "IMS voice available" applies when "IMS voice not available" does not apply.

When IMS voice is not available over 3GPP access, if the UE's usage setting is "voice centric", the UE operates in single-registration mode, and the UE:

a) does not have a persistent PDU session, and:

1) if the UE is only registered over 3GPP access, or if the UE is registered over both 3GPP access and non-3GPP access and IMS voice is not available over non-3GPP access, the UE shall disable the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access and proceed as specified in subclause4.9.2 with modifications described below;. or

2) if the UE is registered over both 3GPP access and non-3GPP access and IMS voice is available over non-3GPP access, the UE may disable the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access and proceed as specified in subclause4.9.2 with modifications described below; or

b) has a persistent PDU session, then the UE waits until the radio bearer associated with the persistent PDU session has been released. When the radio bearer associated with the persistent PDU session has been released, then:

1) if the UE is only registered over 3GPP access, or if the UE is registered over both 3GPP access and non-3GPP access and IMS voice is not available over non-3GPP access,the UE shall disable the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access and proceed as specified in subclause4.9.2 with modifications described below; or

2) If the UE is registered over both 3GPP access and non-3GPP access and IMS voice is available over non-3GPP access, the UE may disable the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access and proceed as specified in subclause4.9.2 with modifications described below.

The following modifications are applied to the procedure in subclause4.9.2 for disabling the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access, if the UE's usage setting is "voice centric" and the UE operates in single-registration mode:

a) in itema) of subclause4.9.2, the UE shall attempt to select an E-UTRA cell connected to EPC. If such a cell is found, the UE shall then perform voice domain selection procedures as defined in 3GPPTS24.301[15]; and

b) in itemb) of subclause4.9.2, if an E-UTRA cell connected to EPC cannot be found, the UE shall attempt to select another supported radio access technology which supports voice services.

When IMS voice is not available over non-3GPP access, if the UE's usage setting is "voice centric" and the UE operates in single-registration mode, then:

a) if the UE is only registered over non-3GPP access, the UE shall disable the N1 mode capability for non-3GPP access (see subclause4.9.3); or

b) if the UE is registered over both 3GPP access and non-3GPP access and IMS voice is not available also over 3GPP access, the UE may disable the N1 mode capability for non-3GPP access (see subclause4.9.3).

NOTE2:  The UE can register over 3GPP access in another mode, e.g., S1 mode, for voice service, and in this case the UE can keep the N1 mode capability for non-3GPP access enabled.

4.3.3 Change of UE's usage setting

If the UE operates in single-registration mode, whenever the UE's usage setting changes, the UE shall execute procedures according to table4.3.3.1:

Table4.3.3.1: Change of UE's usage setting for a UE in single-registration mode

UE's usage setting change

Procedure to execute

From "data centric" to "voice centric" and "IMS voice not available" over 3GPP access only

Disable the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access (see subclause4.9.2), if the UE is only registered over 3GPP access (NOTE)



From "data centric" to "voice centric", and "IMS voice not available" over both 3GPP access and non-3GPP access

Disable the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access (see subclause4.9.2) and non-3GPP access (see subclause4.9.3), if the UE is registered over both 3GPP access and non-3GPP access

Disable the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access (see subclause 4.9.2), if the UE is only registered over 3GPP access.

Disable the N1 mode capability for non-3GPP access (see subclause 4.9.3), if the UE is only registered over non-3GPP access.

(NOTE)



From "voice centric" to "data centric" and the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access is  disabled at the UE due to "IMS voice not available"

Re-enable the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access (see subclause4.9.2)

From "data centric" to "voice centric" and "IMS voice not available" over non-3GPP access only

Disable the N1 mode capability for non-3GPP access (see subclause4.9.3), if the UE is only registered over non-3GPP access



From "voice centric" to "data centric", and the N1 mode capability for non-3GPP access is disabled at the UE due to "IMS voice not available"

Re-enable the N1 mode capability for non-3GPP access (see subclause4.9.3)

NOTE: If the UE is registered over 3GPP access and has a persistent PDU session, then the UE waits until the radio bearer associated with the persistent PDU session has been released.



4.3.4 Change or determination of IMS voice availability

If the UE operates in single-registration mode, whenever the IMS voice availability is determined or changes, the UE shall execute procedures according to table4.3.4.1:

Table4.3.4.1: Change of IMS voice availability for a UE in single-registration mode

Change of IMS voice available condition

Procedure to execute

"IMS voice not available" over 3GPP access only and the UE's usage setting is "voice centric"

Disable the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access, if the UE is only registered over 3GPP access (see subclause4.9.2). (NOTE2)

"IMS voice not available" over non-3GPP access only and the UE's usage setting is "voice centric"

Disable the N1 mode capability for non-3GPP access (see subclause4.9.3), if the UE is only registered over non-3GPP access. (NOTE2)

"IMS voice not available" over both 3GPP access and non-3GPP access, and the UE's usage setting is "voice centric"

Disable the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access (see subclause4.9.2) and non-3GPP access (see subclause4.9.3), if the UE is registered over both 3GPP access and non-3GPP access.

Disable the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access (see subclause4.9.2), if the UE is only registered over 3GPP access

Disable the N1 mode capability for non-3GPP access (see subclause4.9.3), if the UE is only registered over non-3GPP access.

(NOTE1, NOTE2)

NOTE1: If the UE is registered over 3GPP access and has a persistent PDU session, then the UE waits until the radio bearer associated with the persistent PDU session has been released.

NOTE2: If the UE determines "IMS voice not available" upon receipt of a 5GS session management reject message including a back-off timer value, and the re-attempt indicator indicates that the UE is not allowed to re-attempt the procedure in S1 mode then, upon inter-system change from N1 mode to S1 mode, the UE proceeds as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15], subclause4.3.2.4, Change or determination of IMS registration status.



4.4 NAS security

4.4.1 General

This clause describes the principles for the handling of 5G NAS security contexts in the UE and in the AMF, the procedures used for the security protection of NAS messages between the UE and the AMF, and the procedures used for the protection of NAS IEs between the UE and the UDM. Security protection involves integrity protection and ciphering of the 5GMM messages. 5GSM messages are security protected indirectly by being piggybacked by the security protected 5GMM messages (i.e. UL NAS TRANSPORT message and the DL NAS TRANSPORT message).

The signalling procedures for the control of NAS security are part of the 5GMM protocol and are described in detail in clause5.

NOTE: The use of ciphering in a network is an operator option. In this subclause, for the ease of description, it is assumed that ciphering is used, unless explicitly indicated otherwise. Operation of a network without ciphering is achieved by configuring the AMF so that it always selects the "null ciphering algorithm", 5G-EA0.

4.4.2 Handling of 5G NAS security contexts

4.4.2.1 General

The security parameters for authentication, integrity protection and ciphering are tied together in a 5G NAS security context and identified by a key set identifier (ngKSI). The relationship between the security parameters is defined in 3GPPTS33.501[24].

Before security can be activated, the AMF and the UE need to establish a 5G NAS security context. Usually, the 5G NAS security context is created as the result of a primary authentication and key agreement procedure between the AMF and the UE. A new 5G NAS security context may also be created during an N1 mode to N1 mode handover. Alternatively, during inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode, the AMF not supporting interworking without N26 and the UE operating in single-registration mode may derive a mapped 5G NAS security context from an EPS security context that has been established while the UE was in S1 mode.

The 5G NAS security context is taken into use by the UE and the AMF, when the AMF initiates a security mode control procedure, during an N1 mode to N1 mode handover, or during the inter-system change procedure from S1 mode to N1 mode. The 5G NAS security context which has been taken into use by the network most recently is called current 5G NAS security context. This current 5G NAS security context can be of type native or mapped, i.e. originating from a native 5G NAS security context or mapped 5G NAS security context.

The key set identifier ngKSI is assigned by the AMF either during the primary authentication and key agreement procedure or, for the mapped 5G NAS security context, during the inter-system change. The ngKSI consists of a value and a type of security context parameter indicating whether a 5G NAS security context is a native 5G NAS security context or a mapped 5G NAS security context. When the 5G NAS security context is a native 5G NAS security context, the ngKSI has the value of KSIAMF, and when the current 5G NAS security context is of type mapped, the ngKSI has the value of KSIASME.

The 5G NAS security context which is indicated by an ngKSI can be taken into use to establish the secure exchange of NAS messages when a new N1 NAS signalling connection is established without executing a new primary authentication and key agreement procedure (see subclause5.4.1) or when the AMF initiates a security mode control procedure. For this purpose, the initial NAS messages (i.e. REGISTRATION REQUEST, DEREGISTRATION REQUEST, SERVICE REQUEST and CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST) and the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message contain an ngKSI in the ngKSI IE indicating the current 5G NAS security context used to integrity protect the NAS message.

In the present document, when the UE is required to delete an ngKSI, the UE shall set the ngKSI to the value "no key is available" and consider also the associated keys KAMF or K'AMF, 5G NAS ciphering key and 5G NAS integrity key invalid (i.e. the 5G NAS security context associated with the ngKSI as no longer valid). In the initial registration procedure, when the key KAUSF, is invalid, the UE shall delete the ngKSI.

NOTE: In some specifications the term ciphering key sequence number might be used instead of the term key set identifier (KSI).

As described in subclause4.8 in order to interwork with E-UTRAN connected to EPC, the UE supporting both S1 mode and N1 mode can operate in either single-registration mode or dual-registration mode. A UE operating in dual-registration mode shall independently maintain and use both EPS security context (see 3GPPTS24.301[15]) and 5G NAS security context. When the UE operating in dual-registration mode performs an EPS attach procedure, it shall take into use an EPS security context and follow the handling of this security context as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15]. However, when the UE operating in dual-registration mode performs an initial registration procedure, it shall take into use a 5G NAS security context and follow the handling of this security context as described in the present specification.

The UE and the AMF need to be able to maintain two 5G NAS security contexts simultaneously, i.e. a current 5G NAS security context and a non-current 5G NAS security context, since:

a) after a 5G re-authentication, the UE and the AMF can have both a current 5G NAS security context and a non-current 5G NAS security context which has not yet been taken into use (i.e. a partial native 5G NAS security context); and

b) after an inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode, the UE and the AMF can have both a mapped 5G NAS security context, which is the current 5G NAS security context, and a non-current native 5G NAS security context that was created during a previous access in N1 mode.

The number of 5G NAS security contexts that need to be maintained simultaneously by the UE and the AMF is limited by the following requirements:

a) after a successful 5G (re-)authentication, which creates a new partial native 5G NAS security context, the AMF and the UE shall delete the non-current 5G NAS security context, if any;

b) when a partial native 5G NAS security context is taken into use through a security mode control procedure, the AMF shall delete the previously current 5G NAS security context. If the UE does not support multiple records of NAS security context storage for multiple registration (see 3GPPTS31.102[22]), the UE shall delete the previously current 5G NAS security context. If the UE supports multiple records of NAS security context storage for multiple registration, the UE shall:

1) replace the previously current 5G NAS security context stored in the first 5G security context of that access (see 3GPPTS31.102[22]) with the new 5G security context (taken into use through a security mode control procedure), when the UE activates the new 5G security context for the same PLMN and access; or

2) store the previously current 5G NAS security context in the second 5G security context of that access (see 3GPPTS31.102[22]) and store the new 5G security context (taken into use through a security mode control procedure) in the first 5G security context, when the UE activates the new 5G security context for a different PLMN over that access but the previously current 5G NAS security context is associated with the 5G-GUTI of the other access;

c) when the AMF and the UE create a 5G NAS security context using "null integrity protection algorithm" and "null ciphering algorithm" during an initial registration procedure for emergency services, or a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update for a UE that has an emergency PDU session (see subclause5.4.2.2), the AMF and the UE shall delete the previous current 5G NAS security context;

d) when a new mapped 5G NAS security context or 5G NAS security context created using "null integrity protection algorithm" and "null ciphering algorithm" is taken into use during the inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode, the AMF and the UE shall not delete the previously current native 5G NAS security context, if any. Instead, the previously current native 5G NAS security context shall become a non-current native 5G NAS security context, and the AMF and the UE shall delete any partial native 5G NAS security context;

 If no previously current native 5G NAS security context exists, the AMF and the UE shall not delete the partial native 5G NAS security context, if any;

e) when the AMF and the UE derive a new mapped 5G NAS security context during inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode, the AMF and the UE shall delete any existing current mapped 5G NAS security context;

f) when a non-current full native 5G NAS security context is taken into use by a security mode control procedure, then the AMF and the UE shall delete the previously current mapped 5G NAS security context;

g) when the UE or the AMF moves from 5GMM-REGISTERED to 5GMM-DEREGISTERED state, if the current 5G NAS security context is a mapped 5G NAS security context and a non-current full native 5G NAS security context exists, then the non-current 5G NAS security context shall become the current 5G NAS security context. Furthermore, the UE and the AMF shall delete any mapped 5G NAS security context or partial native 5G NAS security context.

h) when the UE operating in single-registration mode in a network supporting N26 interface performs an inter-system change from N1 mode to S1 mode:

1) if the UE has a mapped 5G NAS security context and the inter-system change is performed in:

i) 5GMM-IDLE mode, the UE shall delete the mapped 5G NAS security context after the successful completion of the tracking area update procedure or attach procedure (see 3GPPTS24.301[15]); or

ii) 5GMM-CONNECTED mode, the UE shall delete the mapped 5G NAS security context after the completion of the inter-system change.

 After deletion of the mapped 5G NAS security context, if the UE has a non-current full native 5G NAS security context, then the non-current full native 5G NAS security context shall become the current full native 5G NAS security context; and

i) when the UE operating in single-registration mode in a network supporting N26 interface performs an inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode in 5GMM-IDLE mode, if the UE has a non-current full native 5G NAS security context, then the UE shall make the non-current full native 5G NAS security context as the current native 5G NAS security context. The UE shall delete the mapped 5G NAS security context, if any.

If the UE is capable of registration over both 3GPP access and non-3GPP access, the UE in the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED over both 3GPP access and non-3GPP access shall mark the 5G NAS security contexts of the 3GPP access and the non-3GPP access on the USIM or in the non-volatile memory as invalid when the UE initiates an initial registration procedure over either 3GPP access or non-3GPP access as described in subclause5.5.1.2 or when the UE leaves state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED for any other state except 5GMM-NULL over either 3GPP access or non-3GPP access. Otherwise, the UE shall mark the 5G NAS security context on the USIM or in the non-volatile memory as invalid when the UE initiates an initial registration procedure as described in subclause5.5.1.2 or when the UE leaves state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED for any other state except 5GMM-NULL.

If the UE is capable of registration over both 3GPP access and non-3GPP access, the UE shall store the current native 5G NAS security contexts of the 3GPP access and the non-3GPP access as specified in annexC and mark them as valid only when the UE enters state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED from any other state except 5GMM-NULL over both the 3GPP access and non-3GPP access or only when the UE aborts the initial registration procedure without having left 5GMM-DEREGISTERED over both the 3GPP access and non-3GPP access. Otherwise, the UE shall store the current native 5G NAS security context as specified in annexC and mark it as valid only when the UE enters state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED from any other state except 5GMM-NULL or when the UE aborts the initial registration procedure without having left 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.

4.4.2.2 Establishment of a mapped 5G NAS security context during inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode

In order for the UE operating in single-registration mode in a network supporting N26 interface to derive a mapped 5G NAS security context for an inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode, the AMF shall construct a mapped 5G NAS security context from the EPS security context received from the source MME as indicated in 3GPPTS33.501[24]. The AMF shall select the 5G NAS security algorithms and derive the 5G NAS keys (i.e. KNASenc and KNASint). The AMF shall define an ngKSI for the newly derived K'AMF key such that the value field is taken from the eKSI of the KASME key and the type field is set to indicate a mapped security context and associate this ngKSI with the newly created mapped 5G NAS security context. The AMF shall then include the message authentication code, selected NAS algorithms, NCC and generated ngKSI in the S1 mode to N1 mode NAS transparent container IE (see subclause9.11.2.9).

When the UE operating in single-registration mode in a network supporting N26 interface receives the command to perform inter-system change to N1 mode in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode, the UE shall derive a mapped K'AMF, as indicated in 3GPPTS33.501[24], using the KASME from the EPS security context. Furthermore, the UE shall also derive the 5G NAS keys from the mapped K'AMF using the selected NAS algorithm identifiers included in the S1 mode to N1 mode NAS transparent container IE and associate this mapped 5G NAS security context with the ngKSI value received. The UE shall then verify the received NAS MAC. In case the received NAS MAC is not verified successfully (see subclause 4.4.3.3) the UE shall discard the content of the received S1 mode to N1 mode NAS transparent container IE and inform the lower layers that the received S1 mode to N1 mode NAS transparent container is invalid.

When the UE operating in single-registration mode in a network supporting N26 interface has a PDN connection for emergency bearer services and has no current EPS security context, the AMF shall set 5G-IA0 and 5G-EA0 as the selected 5G NAS security algorithms in the S1 mode to N1 mode NAS transparent container IE. The AMF shall create a locally generated K'AMF. The AMF shall set the ngKSI value of the associated security context to "000" and the type of security context flag to "mapped security context" in the S1 mode to N1 mode NAS transparent container IE.

When the UE operating in single-registration mode in a network supporting N26 interface receives the command to perform inter-system change to N1 mode in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode (see 3GPPTS38.331[30]) and has a PDN connection for emergency bearer services, if 5G-IA0 and 5G-EA0 as the selected 5G NAS security algorithms are included in the S1 mode to N1 mode NAS transparent container IE, the UE shall create a locally generated K'AMF. Furthermore, the UE shall set the ngKSI value of the associated security context to the KSI value received.

After the new mapped 5G NAS security context is taken into use for the 3GPP access following a successful inter system change from S1 mode to N1 mode in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode and the UE is registered with the same PLMN over the 3GPP access and non-3GPP access:

a) if a native 5G NAS security context is used on the non-3GPP access and:

1) the UE is in 5GMM-IDLE mode over non-3GPP access, then the AMF and the UE shall activate and take into use the new mapped 5G NAS security context on the 3GPP access for the non-3GPP access as described in 3GPPTS33.501[24] after the AMF sends or the UE receives the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message respectively. The UE and AMF shall keep the native 5G NAS security context which was used on the non-3GPP access and make it a non-current native 5G NAS security context. The non-current native 5G NAS security context may be re-activated later using the security mode control procedure; or

2) the UE is in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode over non-3GPP access, in order to activate the native 5G NAS security context over the 3GPP access that is active on the non-3GPP access the AMF shall send the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message over the 3GPP access as described in 3GPPTS33.501[24]. The SECURITY MODE COMMAND message shall include the same ngKSI to identify the native 5G NAS security context that is used on the non-3GPP access; or

b) if a mapped 5G NAS security context is used on the non-3GPP access and:

1) the UE is in 5GMM-IDLE mode over non-3GPP access, the AMF and the UE shall activate and take into use the new mapped 5G NAS security context active on the 3GPP access for the non-3GPP access as described in 3GPPTS33.501[24] after the AMF sends or the UE receives the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message respectively; or

2) the UE is in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode over non-3GPP access, in order to activate the same mapped 5G NAS security context over one access that is used on the other access the AMF shall send the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message over one-access as described in 3GPPTS33.501[24]. The SECURITY MODE COMMAND message shall include the same ngKSI to identify the mapped 5G NAS security context that is used over the other access.

If the inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode is not completed successfully, the AMF and the UE operating in single-registration mode in a network supporting N26 interface shall delete the new mapped 5G NAS security context.

4.4.2.3 Establishment of a 5G NAS security context during N1 mode to N1 mode handover

During an N1 mode to N1 mode handover, the target AMF may derive a new 5G NAS security context for which the target AMF creates a new 5G NAS security context as indicated in 3GPPTS33.501[24].

When a new 5G NAS security context is derived using the same KAMF, the target AMF includes the 8 least significant bits of the downlink NAS COUNT in the Intra N1 mode NAS transparent container IE, and indicates that a new KAMF  shall not be derived (see subclause9.11.2.6). The AMF shall increment the downlink NAS COUNT by one after creating the Intra N1 mode NAS transparent container IE.

When a new 5G NAS security context is created from a new KAMF, the target AMF includes the 8 least significant bits of the downlink NAS COUNT in the Intra N1 mode NAS transparent container IE and indicates that a new KAMF shall be derived (see subclause9.11.2.6). The AMF shall then set both the uplink and downlink NAS COUNT counters of this 5G NAS security context to zero. The AMF shall increment the downlink NAS COUNT by one after creating the Intra N1 mode NAS transparent container IE.

The target AMF also includes the ngKSI with the same value as the ngKSI currently being used with the UE, the message authentication code, and the selected NAS algorithms in the Intra N1 mode NAS transparent container IE.

When the UE receives a command to perform handover to NG-RAN including an Intra N1 mode NAS transparent container IE (see subclause9.11.2.6), the UE derives a new 5G NAS security context as described in 3GPPTS33.501[24]. When the Intra N1 mode NAS transparent container IE indicates that a new KAMF needs to be derived, the UE shall set both the downlink NAS COUNT and uplink NAS COUNT to zero after creating the new 5G NAS security context.

If the received Intra N1 mode NAS transparent container IE does not have a valid NAS COUNT (see subclause4.4.3.2) or the received NAS MAC is not verified successfully (see subclause4.4.3.3) the UE shall discard the content of the received Intra N1 mode NAS transparent container IE, continue to use the current 5G NAS security context, and inform the lower layers that the received Intra N1 mode NAS transparent container is invalid.

NOTE1: During N1 mode to N1 mode handover, the Intra N1 mode NAS transparent container IE (see subclause9.11.2.6) is equivalent to sending a SECURITY MODE COMMAND message to the UE in order to derive and use a new 5G NAS security context, optionally created with a new KAMF. The UE maintains the Selected EPS NAS security algorithms until the UE receives a new Selected EPS NAS security algorithms.

After the new 5G NAS security context is taken into use for 3GPP access following a successful N1 mode to N1 mode handover and the UE is registered with the same PLMN over the 3GPP access and non-3GPP access:

a) the UE is in 5GMM-IDLE mode over non-3GPP access, the AMF and the UE shall activate and take into use the new 5G NAS security context over the non-3GPP access as described in 3GPPTS33.501[24] after the AMF sends or the UE receives the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message respectively. If the new 5G NAS security context is created from a new KAMF, the AMF and the UE shall set the downlink NAS COUNT and uplink NAS COUNT to zero also for the non-3GPP access, otherwise the downlink NAS COUNT and uplink NAS COUNT for the non-3GPP access are not changed; or

b) the UE is in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode over non-3GPP access, in order to activate the new 5G NAS security context over the non-3GPP access that has been activated for the 3GPP access the AMF shall send the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message over the non-3GPP access as described in 3GPPTS33.501[24]. The SECURITY MODE COMMAND message shall include the same ngKSI to identify the new 5G NAS security context that was activated over the 3GPP access and shall include the horizontal derivation parameter indicating "KAMF derivation is not required". Otherwise, if the new 5G NAS security context is created from a new KAMF, the AMF and the UE shall set the downlink NAS COUNT and uplink NAS COUNT to zero for the non-3GPP access.

NOTE2: Explicit indication "KAMF derivation is not required" for the non-3GPP access is to align security contexts within the UE without a subsequent derivation of a new KAMF in the non-3GPP access.

4.4.2.4 Establishment of an EPS security context during inter-system change from N1 mode to S1 mode in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode

In order for the UE operating in single-registration mode in a network supporting N26 interface to derive a mapped EPS security context for an inter-system change from N1 mode to S1 mode in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode, the AMF shall prepare a mapped EPS security context for the target MME as indicated in 3GPPTS33.501[24].

The AMF shall derive a K'ASME using the KAMF key and the downlink NAS COUNT of the current 5G NAS security context, include the corresponding NAS sequence number in the N1 mode to S1 mode NAS transparent container IE (see subclause9.11.2.7) and then increments its stored downlink NAS COUNT value by one.

NOTE: The creation of the N1 mode to S1 mode NAS transparent container and the increment of the stored downlink NAS COUNT value by one are performed in prior to transferring the mapped EPS security context to the MME.

The AMF shall select the NAS algorithms identifiers to be used in the target MME after the inter-system change from N1 mode to S1 mode in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode, for encryption and integrity protection. The uplink and downlink NAS COUNT associated with the newly derived K'ASME key are set to the uplink and downlink NAS COUNT value of the current 5G NAS security context, respectively. The eKSI for the newly derived K'ASME key shall be defined such as the value field is taken from the ngKSI and the type field is set to indicate a mapped security context.

When the UE operating in single-registration mode in a network supporting N26 interface receives a command to perform inter-system change from N1 mode to S1 mode in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode, the UE shall derive the mapped EPS security context, i.e. derive K'ASME from KAMF using a downlink NAS COUNT based on the NAS sequence number received in the N1 mode to S1 mode NAS transparent container IE (see subclause9.11.2.7) as described in 3GPPTS33.501[24]. The UE shall set the uplink and downlink NAS COUNT values associated with the newly derived K'ASME key to the uplink and downlink NAS COUNT values of the current 5G NAS security context respectively. The eKSI for the newly derived K'ASME key is defined such that the value field is taken from the ngKSI and the type field is set to indicate a mapped security context. The UE shall also derive the NAS keys as specified in 3GPPTS33.401[23A] using the EPS NAS security algorithms identifiers that are stored in the UE's 5G NAS security context.

If the received N1 mode to S1 mode NAS transparent container IE does not have a valid NAS COUNT (see subclause4.4.3.2) the UE shall discard the content of the received N1 mode to S1 mode NAS transparent container IE and inform the lower layers that the received N1 mode to S1 mode NAS transparent container is invalid.

If the inter-system change from N1 mode to S1 mode in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode is not completed successfully, the AMF and the UE shall delete the new mapped EPS security context.

4.4.2.5 Establishment of secure exchange of NAS messages

Secure exchange of NAS messages via a NAS signalling connection is usually established by the AMF during the registration procedure by initiating a security mode control procedure. After successful completion of the security mode control procedure, all NAS messages exchanged between the UE and the AMF are sent integrity protected using the current 5G security algorithms, and except for the messages specified in subclause4.4.5, all NAS messages exchanged between the UE and the AMF are sent ciphered using the current 5G security algorithms.

During inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode, secure exchange of NAS messages is established between the AMF and the UE by:

a) the transmission of NAS security related parameters encapsulated in the AS signalling from the AMF to the UE triggering the inter-system change in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode (see 3GPPTS33.501[24]). The UE uses these parameters to generate the mapped 5G NAS security context (see subclause8.6.2 of 3GPPTS33.501[24]); and

b) after the inter-system change in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode, the transmission of a REGISTRATION REQUEST message from the UE to the AMF. The UE shall send this message integrity protected using the mapped 5G NAS security context and further protect this message as specified in subclause4.4.6 and subclause5.5.1.3.2. After the AMF receives the REGISTRATION REQUEST message:

1) if the AMF decides to take the native 5G NAS security context into use, the security mode control procedure is performed. From this time onward, all NAS messages exchanged between the UE and the AMF are sent integrity protected using the native 5G NAS security context, and except for the messages specified in subclause4.4.5, all NAS messages exchanged between the UE and the AMF are sent ciphered using the native 5G NAS security context; or

2) if the AMF decides to take the mapped 5G NAS security context into use, from this time onward, all NAS messages exchanged between the UE and the AMF are sent integrity protected using the mapped 5G NAS security context, and except for the messages specified in subclause4.4.5, all NAS messages exchanged between the UE and the AMF are sent ciphered using the mapped 5G NAS security context.

During inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode in 5GMM-IDLE mode, if the UE is operating in single-registration mode and:

a) if the UE has a valid native 5G NAS security context, the UE shall transmit a REGISTRATION REQUEST message integrity protected with the native 5G NAS security context. The UE shall include the ngKSI indicating the native 5G NAS security context value in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

 After receiving the REGISTRATION REQUEST message including the ngKSI indicating a native 5G NAS security context value, the AMF shall check whether the ngKSI included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message belongs to a 5G NAS security context available in the AMF, and shall verify the MAC of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message. If the verification is successful, the AMF deletes the EPS security context received from the source MME if any, and the AMF re-establishes the secure exchange of NAS messages by either:

1) replying with a REGISTRATION ACCEPT message that is integrity protected and ciphered using the native 5G NAS security context. From this time onward, all NAS messages exchanged between the UE and the AMF are sent integrity protected and except for the messages specified in subclause4.4.5, all NAS messages exchanged between the UE and the AMF are sent ciphered; or

2) initiating a security mode control procedure. This can be used by the AMF to take a non-current 5G NAS security context into use or to modify the current 5G NAS security context by selecting new NAS security algorithms.

b) if the UE has no valid native 5G NAS security context, the UE shall send the REGISTRATION REQUEST message without integrity protection and encryption.

 After receiving the REGISTRATION REQUEST message without integrity protection and encryption:

1) if N26 interface is supported:

i) if an EPS security context received from the source MME does not include the NAS security algorithms set to EIA0 and EEA0, the AMF shall either create a fresh mapped 5G NAS security context (see subclause8.6.2 of 3GPPTS33.501[24]) or trigger a primary authentication and key agreement procedure to create a fresh native 5G NAS security context; or

ii) if an EPS security context received from the source MME includes the NAS security algorithms set to EIA0 and EEA0, the AMF shall trigger a primary authentication and key agreement procedure to create a fresh native 5G NAS security context; or

2) if N26 interface is not supported, the AMF shall trigger a primary authentication and key agreement procedure.

 The newly created 5G NAS security context is taken into use by initiating a security mode control procedure and this context becomes the current 5G NAS security context in both the UE and the AMF. This re-establishes the secure exchange of NAS messages.

During an N1 mode to N1 mode handover, secure exchange of NAS messages is established between the AMF and the UE by:

- the transmission of NAS security related parameters encapsulated in the AS signalling from the target AMF to the UE triggering the N1 mode to N1 mode handover (see 3GPPTS33.501[24]). The UE uses these parameters to create a new 5G NAS security context.

The secure exchange of NAS messages shall be continued after N1 mode to N1 mode handover. It is terminated after inter-system change from N1 mode to S1 mode in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode or when the NAS signalling connection is released.

When a UE in 5GMM-IDLE mode establishes a new NAS signalling connection and has a valid current 5G NAS security context, the UE shall transmit the initial NAS message integrity protected with the current 5G NAS security context and further protect this message as specified in subclause4.4.6. The UE shall include the ngKSI indicating the current 5G NAS security context value in the initial NAS message. The AMF shall check whether the ngKSI included in the initial NAS message belongs to a 5G NAS security context available in the AMF, and shall verify the MAC of the NAS message. If the verification is successful, the AMF may re-establish the secure exchange of NAS messages:

a) by replying with a NAS message that is integrity protected and ciphered using the current 5G NAS security context. From this time onward, all NAS messages exchanged between the UE and the AMF are sent integrity protected and except for the messages specified in subclause 4.4.5, all NAS messages exchanged between the UE and the AMF are sent ciphered; or

b) by initiating a security mode control procedure. This can be used by the AMF to take a non-current 5G NAS security context into use or to modify the current 5G NAS security context by selecting new NAS security algorithms.

When a UE attempts multiple registrations in the same or different serving network, both the AMF and the UE shall follow the behavior specified in subclause6.3.2 of 3GPPTS33.501[24]. The UE may support multiple records of NAS security context storage for multiple registration (see 3GPPTS31.102[22]). If the UE supports multiple records of NAS security context storage for multiple registration, the UE can select the appropriate one among the stored 5G security contexts to protect the initial NAS message (see 3GPPTS33.501[24]).

NOTE: For the case when the UE has two records of NAS security context stored and is attempting registration to the PLMN associated with the 5G-GUTI (or an equivalent PLMN) for that access, the UE uses the first NAS security context of that access to protect the initial NAS message. For the case when the UE has two records of NAS security context stored and is attempting registration to the PLMN associated with the second record (or an equivalent PLMN) of that access, the UE uses the second NAS security context of that access to protect the initial NAS message. For other cases when the UE has two records of NAS security context stored and is attempting registration to a PLMN which is not associated with any NAS security context record, the UE uses either record of the NAS security context of that access to protect the initial NAS message.

4.4.2.6 Change of security keys

When the AMF initiates a re-authentication to create a new 5G NAS security context, the messages exchanged during the authentication procedure are integrity protected and ciphered using the current 5G NAS security context, if any.

Both UE and AMF shall continue to use the current 5G NAS security context, until the AMF initiates a security mode control procedure. The SECURITY MODE COMMAND message sent by the AMF includes the ngKSI of the new 5G NAS security context to be used. The AMF shall send the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message integrity protected with the new 5G NAS security context, but unciphered. When the UE responds with a SECURITY MODE COMPLETE message, it shall send the message integrity protected and ciphered with the new 5G NAS security context.

The AMF can also modify the current 5G NAS security context or take the non-current native 5G NAS security context, if any, into use, by sending a SECURITY MODE COMMAND message including the ngKSI of the 5G NAS security context to be modified and including a new set of selected NAS security algorithms. In this case the AMF shall send the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message integrity protected with the modified 5G NAS security context, but unciphered. When the UE replies with a SECURITY MODE COMPLETE message, it shall send the message integrity protected and ciphered with the modified 5G NAS security context.

4.4.3 Handling of NAS COUNT and NAS sequence number

4.4.3.1 General

Each 5G NAS security context shall be associated with two separate counters NAS COUNT per access type in the same PLMN: one related to uplink NAS messages and one related to downlink NAS messages. If the 5G NAS security context is used for access via both 3GPP and non-3GPP access in the same PLMN, there are two NAS COUNT counter pairs associated with the 5G NAS security context. The NAS COUNT counters use 24-bit internal representation and are independently maintained by UE and AMF. The NAS COUNT shall be constructed as a NAS sequence number (8 least significant bits) concatenated with a NAS overflow counter (16 most significant bits).

When NAS COUNT is input to NAS ciphering or NAS integrity algorithms it shall be considered to be a 32-bit entity which shall be constructed by padding the 24-bit internal representation with 8 zeros in the most significant bits.

The value of the uplink NAS COUNT that is stored or read out of the USIM or non-volatile memory as described in annexC, is the value that shall be used in the next NAS message.

The value of the downlink NAS COUNT that is stored or read out of the USIM or non-volatile memory as described in annexC, is the largest downlink NAS COUNT used in a successfully integrity checked NAS message.

The value of the uplink NAS COUNT stored in the AMF is the largest uplink NAS COUNT used in a successfully integrity checked NAS message.

The value of the downlink NAS COUNT stored in the AMF is the value that shall be used in the next NAS message.

The NAS sequence number part of the NAS COUNT shall be exchanged between the UE and the AMF as part of the NAS signalling. After each new or retransmitted outbound SECURITY PROTECTED 5GS NAS MESSAGE message, the sender shall increase the NAS COUNT number by one, except for the initial NAS messages if the lower layers indicated the failure to establish the RRC connection (see 3GPPTS38.331[30]). Specifically, on the sender side, the NAS sequence number shall be increased by one, and if the result is zero (due to wrap around), the stored NAS overflow counter shall also be incremented by one (see subclause4.4.3.5). If, through implementation-dependent means, the receiver determines that the NAS message is a replay of an earlier NAS message, then the receiver handles the received NAS message as described in subclause4.4.3.2. Otherwise, in order to determine the estimated NAS COUNT value to be used for integrity verification of a received NAS message:

- The sequence number part of the estimated NAS COUNT value shall be equal to the sequence number in the received NAS message; and

- If the receiver can guarantee that this NAS message was not previously accepted, then the receiver may select the estimated NAS overflow counter so that the estimated NAS COUNT value is lower than the stored NAS COUNT value; otherwise, the receiver selects the estimated NAS overflow counter so that the estimated NAS COUNT value is higher than the stored NAS COUNT value.

During the inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode, when a mapped 5G NAS security context is derived and taken into use, the AMF shall set both the uplink and downlink NAS COUNT counters of this 5G NAS security context to zero. The UE shall set both the uplink and downlink NAS COUNT counters of this 5G NAS security context to zero.

During the inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode, the AMF shall increment the downlink NAS COUNT by one after it has created an S1 mode to N1 mode NAS transparent container (see subclause9.11.2.9).

During the inter-system change from N1 mode to S1 mode in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode, the AMF shall increment the downlink NAS COUNT by one after it has created an N1 mode to S1 mode NAS transparent container (see subclause9.11.2.7).

During N1 mode to N1 mode handover:

a) if the new 5G NAS security context is created with the same KAMF, the AMF shall signal the 8 least significant bits of the current downlink NAS COUNT value in an Intra N1 mode NAS transparent container (see subclause9.11.2.6). The AMF shall then increment the downlink NAS COUNT by one; or

b) if the new 5G NAS security context is created with a new KAMF, the AMF shall signal the 8 least significant bits of the current downlink NAS COUNT value in an Intra N1 mode NAS transparent container (see subclause9.11.2.6) and shall then set both the uplink and downlink NAS COUNT counters of this 5G NAS security context to zero. The AMF shall then increment the downlink NAS COUNT by one. The UE shall also set both the uplink and downlink NAS COUNT counters to zero.

NOTE: During the inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode, the S1 mode to N1 mode NAS transparent container (see subclause9.11.2.9) is treated as an implicit SECURITY MODE COMMAND message for the UE and the AMF, and therefore the AMF regards the sending of the S1 mode to N1 mode NAS transparent container as the sending of an initial SECURITY MODE COMMAND message in order to derive and take into use a mapped 5G NAS security context for the purpose of the NAS COUNT handling.

4.4.3.2 Replay protection

Replay protection shall be supported for received NAS messages both in the AMF and the UE. However, since the realization of replay protection does not affect the interoperability between nodes, no specific mechanism is required for implementation.

Replay protection assures that one and the same NAS message is not accepted twice by the receiver. Specifically, for a given 5G NAS security context, a given NAS COUNT value shall be accepted at most one time and only if message integrity verifies correctly.

Replay protection is not applicable when 5G-IA0 is used.

4.4.3.3 Integrity protection and verification

The sender shall use its locally stored NAS COUNT as input to the integrity protection algorithm.

The receiver shall use the NAS sequence number included in the received message and an estimate for the NAS overflow counter as defined in subclause4.4.3.1 to form the NAS COUNT input to the integrity verification algorithm.

The algorithm to calculate the integrity protection information is specified in 3GPPTS33.501[24], and in case of the:

a) SECURITY PROTECTED 5GS NAS MESSAGE message, the integrity protection shall include octet 7 to n, i.e. the Sequence number IE and the NAS message IE.

b) Intra N1 mode NAS transparent container IE and S1 mode to N1 mode NAS transparent container IE, the integrity protection shall include all octets of the value part of the IE starting from octet 7.

NOTE: To ensure backward compatibility, the UE uses all octets starting from octet 7 in the received NAS transparent container for the purpose of integrity check of the NAS transparent container irrespective of the release/version it supports. After a successful integrity check, the UE can ignore the octets which are not specified in the release/version which the UE supports.

In addition to the data that is to be integrity protected, the BEARER ID, DIRECTION bit, NAS COUNT and 5G NAS integrity key are input to the integrity protection algorithm. These parameters are described in 3GPPTS33.501[24].

After successful integrity protection validation, the receiver shall update its corresponding locally stored NAS COUNT with the value of the estimated NAS COUNT for this NAS message.

Integrity verification is not applicable when 5G-IA0 is used.

4.4.3.4 Ciphering and deciphering

The sender shall use its locally stored NAS COUNT as input to the ciphering algorithm.

The receiver shall use the NAS sequence number included in the received message and an estimate for the NAS overflow counter as defined in subclause4.4.3.1 to form the NAS COUNT input to the deciphering algorithm.

The input parameters to the NAS ciphering algorithm are the BEARER ID, DIRECTION bit, NAS COUNT, NAS encryption key and the length of the key stream to be generated by the encryption algorithm.

When applying initial NAS message protection to the REGISTRATION REQUEST or SERVICE REQUEST message as described in subclause4.4.6, the length of the key stream is set to the length of the entire plain NAS message that is included in the NAS message container IE, i.e. the value part of the NAS message container IE, that is to be ciphered.

When applying initial NAS message protection to the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message as described in subclause4.4.6, the length of the key stream is set to the length of:

a) the value part of the CIoT small data container IE that is to be ciphered; or

b) the value part of the NAS message container IE that is to be ciphered.

4.4.3.5 NAS COUNT wrap around

If, when increasing the NAS COUNT as specified above, the AMF detects that either its downlink NAS COUNT or the UE's uplink NAS COUNT is "close" to wrap around, (close to 224), the AMF shall take the following actions:

- If there is no non-current native 5G NAS security context with sufficiently low NAS COUNT values, the AMF shall initiate a new primary authentication and key agreement procedure with the UE, leading to a new established 5G NAS security context and the NAS COUNT being reset to 0 in both the UE and the AMF when the new 5G NAS security context is activated;

- Otherwise, the AMF can activate a non-current native 5G NAS security context with sufficiently low NAS COUNT values or initiate a new primary authentication and key agreement procedure as specified above.

If for some reason a new KAMF has not been established using primary authentication and key agreement procedure before the NAS COUNT wraps around, the node (AMF or UE) in need of sending a NAS message shall instead release the NAS signalling connection. Prior to sending the next uplink NAS message, the UE shall delete the ngKSI indicating the current 5G NAS security context.

When the 5G-IA0 is used as the NAS integrity algorithm, the UE and the AMF shall allow NAS COUNT wrap around. If NAS COUNT wrap around occurs, the following requirements apply:

a) the UE and the AMF shall continue to use the current 5G NAS security context;

b) the AMF shall not initiate the primary authentication and key agreement procedure;

c) the AMF shall not release the NAS signalling connection; and

d) the UE shall not perform a local release of the NAS signalling connection.

4.4.4 Integrity protection of NAS signalling messages

4.4.4.1 General

For the UE, integrity protected signalling is mandatory for the 5GMM NAS messages once a valid 5G NAS security context exists and has been taken into use. For the network, integrity protected signalling is mandatory for the 5GMM NAS messages once a secure exchange of 5GS NAS messages has been established for the NAS signalling connection. Integrity protection of all NAS signalling messages is the responsibility of the NAS. It is the network which activates integrity protection.

The use of "null integrity protection algorithm" 5G-IA0 (see subclause9.11.3.34) in the current 5G NAS security context is only allowed:

a) for an unauthenticated UE for which establishment of emergency services is allowed;

b) for an W-AGF acting on behalf of an FN-RG; and

c) for a W-AGF acting on behalf of an N5GC device.

For setting the security header type in outbound NAS messages, the UE and the AMF shall apply the same rules irrespective of whether the "null integrity protection algorithm" or any other integrity protection algorithm is indicated in the 5G NAS security context.

If the "null integrity protection algorithm"5G-IA0 has been selected as an integrity protection algorithm, the receiver shall regard the NAS messages with the security header indicating integrity protection as integrity protected.

Details of the integrity protection and verification of NAS signalling messages are specified in 3GPPTS33.501[24].

When a NAS message needs to be sent both ciphered and integrity protected, the NAS message is first ciphered and then the ciphered NAS message and the NAS sequence number are integrity protected by calculating the MAC.

NOTE: NAS messages that are ciphered with the "null ciphering algorithm" 5G-EA0 are regarded as ciphered (see subclause4.4.5).

When a NAS message needs to be sent only integrity protected and unciphered, the unciphered NAS message and the NAS sequence number are integrity protected by calculating the MAC.

When a 5GSM message is piggybacked in a 5GMM message, there is only one Sequence number IE and one Message authentication code IE for the 5GMM message piggybacking the 5GSM message.

4.4.4.2 Integrity checking of NAS signalling messages in the UE

Except the messages listed below, no NAS signalling messages shall be processed by the receiving 5GMM entity in the UE or forwarded to the 5GSM entity, unless the network has established secure exchange of 5GS NAS messages for the NAS signalling connection:

a) IDENTITY REQUEST (if requested identification parameter is SUCI);

b) AUTHENTICATION REQUEST;

c) AUTHENTICATION RESULT;

d) AUTHENTICATION REJECT;

e) REGISTRATION REJECT (if the 5GMM cause is not #76 or #78);

f) DEREGISTRATION ACCEPT (for non switch off); and

g) SERVICE REJECT (if the 5GMM cause is not #76 or #78).

NOTE: These messages are accepted by the UE without integrity protection, as in certain situations they are sent by the network before security can be activated.

Integrity protection is never applied directly to 5GSM messages, but to the 5GMM message in which the 5GSM message is included.

Once the secure exchange of NAS messages has been established, the receiving 5GMM entity in the UE shall not process any NAS signalling messages unless they have been successfully integrity checked by the NAS. If NAS signalling messages, having not successfully passed the integrity check, are received, then the NAS in the UE shall discard that message. The processing of the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message that has not successfully passed the integrity check is specified in subclause5.4.2.5. If any NAS signalling message is received as not integrity protected even though the secure exchange of NAS messages has been established by the network, then the NAS shall discard this message.

4.4.4.3 Integrity checking of NAS signalling messages in the AMF

Except the messages listed below, no NAS signalling messages shall be processed by the receiving 5GMM entity in the AMF or forwarded to the 5GSM entity, unless the secure exchange of NAS messages has been established for the NAS signalling connection:

a) REGISTRATION REQUEST;

b) IDENTITY RESPONSE (if requested identification parameter is SUCI);

c) AUTHENTICATION RESPONSE;

d) AUTHENTICATION FAILURE;

e) SECURITY MODE REJECT;

f) DEREGISTRATION REQUEST; and

g) DEREGISTRATION ACCEPT;

NOTE1: The REGISTRATION REQUEST message is sent by the UE without integrity protection, if the registration procedure is initiated due to an inter-system change in 5GMM-IDLE mode and no current 5G NAS security context is available in the UE. The other messages are accepted by the AMF without integrity protection, as in certain situations they are sent by the UE before security can be activated.

NOTE2: The DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message can be sent by the UE without integrity protection, e.g. if the UE is registered for emergency services and there is no valid 5G NAS security context available, or if due to user interaction a registration procedure is cancelled before the secure exchange of NAS messages has been established. For these cases the network can attempt to use additional criteria (e.g. whether the UE is subsequently still performing periodic registration update or still responding to paging) before marking the UE as 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.

Integrity protection is never applied directly to 5GSM messages, but to the 5GMM message in which the 5GSM message is included.

Once a current 5G NAS security context exists, until the secure exchange of NAS messages has been established for the NAS signalling connection, the receiving 5GMM entity in the AMF shall process the following NAS signalling messages, even if the MAC included in the message fails the integrity check or cannot be verified, as the 5G NAS security context is not available in the network:

a) REGISTRATION REQUEST;

b) IDENTITY RESPONSE (if requested identification parameter is SUCI);

c) AUTHENTICATION RESPONSE;

d) AUTHENTICATION FAILURE;

e) SECURITY MODE REJECT;

f) DEREGISTRATION REQUEST;

g) DEREGISTRATION ACCEPT;

h) SERVICE REQUEST; and

i) CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST;

NOTE3: These messages are processed by the AMF even when the MAC that fails the integrity check or cannot be verified, as in certain situations they can be sent by the UE protected with a 5G NAS security context that is no longer available in the network.

If a REGISTRATION REQUEST message for initial registration fails the integrity check and it is not a registration request for emergency services, the AMF shall authenticate the subscriber before processing the registration request any further. Additionally, the AMF shall initiate a security mode control procedure, and include the Additional 5G security information IE with the RINMR bit set to "Retransmission of the initial NAS message requested" in the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message as specified in subclause5.4.2.2. For the case when the registration procedure is for emergency services see subclause5.5.1.2.3 and subclause5.4.1.3.5.

If a REGISTRATION REQUEST message for mobility and periodic registration update fails the integrity check and the UE provided EPS NAS message container IE which was successfully verified by the source MME, the AMF may create a mapped 5G NAS security context and initiate a security mode control procedure to take the new mapped 5G NAS security context into use; otherwise if the UE has only a non-emergency PDU session established, the AMF shall initiate a primary authentication and key agreement procedure to create a new native 5G NAS security context. Additionally, the AMF shall initiate a security mode control procedure, and include the Additional 5G security information IE with the RINMR bit set to "Retransmission of the initial NAS message requested" in the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message as specified in subclause5.4.2.2. For the case when the UE has an emergency PDU session see subclause5.5.1.3.3 and subclause5.4.1.3.5.

If a DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message fails the integrity check, the AMF shall proceed as follows:

- If it is not a deregistration request due to switch off, and the AMF can initiate an authentication procedure, the AMF should authenticate the subscriber before processing the deregistration request any further.

- If it is a deregistration request due to switch off, or the AMF does not initiate an authentication procedure for any other reason, the AMF may ignore the deregistration request and remain in state 5GMM-REGISTERED.

NOTE4: The network can attempt to use additional criteria (e.g. whether the UE is subsequently still performing periodic registration update or still responding to paging) before marking the UE as 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.

If a SERVICE REQUEST or CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message fails the integrity check and the UE has only non-emergency PDU sessions established, the AMF shall send the SERVICE REJECT message with 5GMM cause #9 "UE identity cannot be derived by the network" and keep the 5GMM-context and 5G NAS security context unchanged. For the case when the UE has an emergency PDU session and integrity check fails, the AMF may skip the authentication procedure even if no 5G NAS security context is available and proceed directly to the execution of the security mode control procedure as specified in subclause 5.4.2. Additionally, the AMF shall include the Additional 5G security information IE with the RINMR bit set to "Retransmission of the initial NAS message requested" in the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message as specified in subclause5.4.2.2. After successful completion of the service request procedure, the network shall perform a local release of all non-emergency PDU sessions. The emergency PDU sessions shall not be released.

Once the secure exchange of NAS messages has been established for the NAS signalling connection, the receiving 5GMM entity in the AMF shall not process any NAS signalling messages unless they have been successfully integrity checked by the NAS. If any NAS signalling message, having not successfully passed the integrity check, is received, then the NAS in the AMF shall discard that message. If any NAS signalling message is received, as not integrity protected even though the secure exchange of NAS messages has been established, then the NAS shall discard this message.

4.4.5 Ciphering of NAS signalling messages

The use of ciphering in a network is an operator option subject to AMF configuration. When operation of the network without ciphering is configured, the AMF shall indicate the use of "null ciphering algorithm" 5G-EA0 (see subclause9.11.3.34) in the current 5G NAS security context for all UEs. For setting the security header type in outbound NAS messages, the UE and the AMF shall apply the same rules irrespective of whether the "null ciphering algorithm" or any other ciphering algorithm is indicated in the 5G NAS security context.

When the UE establishes a new N1 NAS signalling connection, it shall apply security protection to the initial NAS message as described in subclause4.4.6.

The UE shall start the ciphering and deciphering of NAS messages when the secure exchange of NAS messages has been established for an N1 NAS signalling connection. From this time onward, unless explicitly defined, the UE shall send all NAS messages ciphered until the N1 NAS signalling connection is released, or the UE performs inter-system change to S1 mode.

The AMF shall start ciphering and deciphering of NAS messages as described in subclause4.4.2.5. From this time onward, except for the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message, the AMF shall send all NAS messages ciphered until the N1 NAS signalling connection is released, or the UE performs inter-system change to S1 mode.

Ciphering is never applied directly to 5GSM messages, but to the 5GMM message in which the 5GSM message is included.

Once the encryption of NAS messages has been started between the AMF and the UE, the receiver shall discard the unciphered NAS messages which shall have been ciphered according to the rules described in this specification.

If the "null ciphering algorithm" 5G-EA0 has been selected as a ciphering algorithm, the NAS messages with the security header indicating ciphering are regarded as ciphered.

Details of ciphering and deciphering of NAS signalling messages are specified in 3GPPTS33.501[24].

4.4.6 Protection of initial NAS signalling messages

The 5GS supports protection of initial NAS messages as specified in 3GPPTS33.501[24]. The protection of initial NAS messages applies to the REGISTRATION REQUEST, SERVICE REQUEST and CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message, and is achieved as follows:

a) If the UE does not have a valid 5G NAS security context, the UE sends a REGISTRATION REQUEST message including cleartext IEs only. After activating a 5G NAS security context resulting from a security mode control procedure:

1) if the UE needs to send non-cleartext IEs, the UE shall include the entire REGISTRATION REQUEST message (i.e. containing both cleartext IEs and non-cleartext IEs) in the NAS message container IE and shall include the NAS message container IE in the SECURITY MODE COMPLETE message; or

2) if the UE does not need to send non-cleartext IEs, the UE shall include the entire REGISTRATION REQUEST message (i.e. containing cleartext IEs only) in the NAS message container IE and shall include the NAS message container IE in the SECURITY MODE COMPLETE message.

b) If the UE has a valid 5G NAS security context and:

1) the UE needs to send non-cleartext IEs in a REGISTRATION REQUEST or SERVICE REQUEST message, the UE includes the entire REGISTRATION REQUEST or SERVICE REQUEST message (i.e. containing both cleartext IEs and non-cleartext IEs) in the NAS message container IE and shall cipher the value part of the NAS message container IE. The UE shall then send a REGISTRATION REQUEST or SERVICE REQUEST message containing the cleartext IEs and the NAS message container IE;

2) the UE needs to send non-cleartext IEs in a CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message:

i) if CIoT small data container IE is the only non-cleartext IE to be sent, the UE shall cipher the value part of the CIoT small data container IE. The UE shall then send a CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message containing the cleartext IEs and the CIoT small data container IE;

ii) otherwise, the UE includes non-cleartext IEs in the NAS message container IE and shall cipher the value part of the NAS message container IE. The UE shall then send a CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message containing the cleartext IEs and the NAS message container IE;

3) the UE does not need to send non-cleartext IEs in a REGISTRATION REQUEST or SERVICE REQUEST message, the UE sends the REGISTRATION REQUEST or SERVICE REQUEST message without including the NAS message container IE; or

4) the UE does not need to send non-cleartext IEs in a CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message, the UE sends the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message without including the NAS message container IE and the CIoT small data container IE.

When the initial NAS message is a REGISTRATION REQUEST message, the cleartext IEs are:

- Extended protocol discriminator;

- Security header type;

- Spare half octet;

- Registration request message identity;

- 5GS registration type;

- ngKSI;

- 5GS mobile identity;

- UE security capability;

- Additional GUTI;

- UE status;

- EPS NAS message container;

- NID; and

- PLMN with disaster condition.

When the initial NAS message is a SERVICE REQUEST message, the cleartext IEs are:

- Extended protocol discriminator;

- Security header type;

- Spare half octet;

- ngKSI;

- Service request message identity;

- Service type; and

- 5G-S-TMSI.

When the initial NAS message is a CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message, the cleartext IEs are:

- Extended protocol discriminator;

- Security header type;

- Spare half octet;

- ngKSI;

- Control plane service request message identity; and

- Control plane service type.

When the UE sends a REGISTRATION REQUEST or SERVICE REQUEST or CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message that includes a NAS message container IE, the UE shall set the security header type of the initial NAS message to "integrity protected".

When the AMF receives an integrity protected initial NAS message which includes a NAS message container IE, the AMF shall decipher the value part of the NAS message container IE. If the received initial NAS message is a REGISTRATION REQUEST message or a SERVICE REQUEST message, the AMF shall consider the NAS message that is obtained from the NAS message container IE as the initial NAS message that triggered the procedure.

When the AMF receives a CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message which includes a CIoT small data container IE, the AMF shall decipher the value part of the CIoT small data container IE and handle the message as specified in subclause5.6.1.4.2.

When the initial NAS message is a DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message, the UE always sends the NAS message unciphered.

If the UE:

a) has 5G-EA0 as a selected 5G NAS security algorithm; and

b) selects a PLMN other than Registered PLMN and EPLMN over one access;

the UE shall send an initial NAS message including cleartext IEs only via the access type associated with the newly selected PLMN as described in this subclause for the case when the UE does not have a valid 5G NAS security context.

If the UE:

a) has 5G-EA0 as a selected 5G NAS security algorithm; and

b) selects a PLMN other than Registered PLMN and EPLMN over one access, and the Registered PLMN or EPLMN is not registering or registered over other access;

the UE shall delete the 5G NAS security context.

NOTE: UE deletes the 5G NAS security context only if the UE is not in the connected mode.

4.4.7 Protection of NAS IEs

The network can provide the SOR transparent container IE during the registration procedure to the UE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. The SOR transparent container IE is integrity protected by the HPLMN or subscribed SNPN as specified in 3GPPTS33.501[24].

The UE can provide the SOR transparent container IE during the registration procedure to the network in the REGISTRATION COMPLETE message. The SoR-MAC-IUE in the SOR transparent container IE is generated by the UE as specified in 3GPPTS33.501[24].

The network can provide the Payload container IE during the Network-initiated NAS transport procedure to the UE in DL NAS TRANSPORT message. If the Payload container type IE is set to "SOR transparent container" or "UE parameters update transparent container", the Payload container IE is integrity protected by the HPLMN or subscribed SNPN as specified in 3GPPTS33.501[24]. If the Payload container type IE is set to "Multiple payloads" and the payload container type field of the payload container entry is set to "SOR transparent container" or "UE parameters update transparent container", the payload container entry contents field of the payload container entry is integrity protected correspondingly.

The UE can provide the Payload container IE during the UE-initiated NAS transport procedure to the network in UL NAS TRANSPORT message. If the Payload container type IE is set to "SOR transparent container" or "UE parameters update transparent container", the SoR-MAC-IUE or UPU-MAC-IUE in the Payload container IE is generated by the UE as specified in 3GPPTS33.501[24]. If the Payload container type IE is set to "Multiple payloads" and the payload container type field of the payload container entry is set to "SOR transparent container" or "UE parameters update transparent container", the SoR-MAC-IUE or UPU-MAC-IUE in the payload container entry contents field of the payload container entry is generated by the UE correspondingly.

4.5 Unified access control

4.5.1 General

When the UE needs to access the 5GS, the UE not operating as an IAB-node (see 3GPPTS23.501[8]) first performs access control checks to determine if the access is allowed. Access control checks shall be performed for the access attempts defined by the following list of events:

NOTE1: Although the UE operating as an IAB-node skips the access control checks, the UE operating as an IAB-node determines an access category and one or more access identities for each access attempt in order to derive an RRC establishment cause. In this case the NAS provides the RRC establishment cause but does not provide the access category and the one or more access identities to the lower layers.

a) the UE is in 5GMM-IDLE mode or 5GMM-IDLE mode with suspend indication over 3GPP access and an event that requires a transition to 5GMM-CONNECTED mode occurs; and

b) the UE is in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode over 3GPP access or 5GMM-CONNECTED mode with RRC inactive indication and one of the following events occurs:

1) 5GMM receives an MO-IMS-registration-related-signalling-started indication, an MO-MMTEL-voice-call-started indication, an MO-MMTEL-video-call-started indication or an MO-SMSoIP-attempt-started indication from upper layers;

2) 5GMM receives a request from upper layers to send a mobile originated SMS over NAS unless the request triggered a service request procedure to transition the UE from 5GMM-IDLE mode or 5GMM-IDLE mode with suspend indication to 5GMM-CONNECTED mode;

3) 5GMM receives a request from upper layers to send an UL NAS TRANSPORT message for the purpose of PDU session establishment unless the request triggered a service request procedure to transition the UE from 5GMM-IDLE mode or 5GMM-IDLE mode with suspend indication to 5GMM-CONNECTED mode;

4) 5GMM receives a request from upper layers to send an UL NAS TRANSPORT message for the purpose of PDU session modification unless the request triggered a service request procedure to transition the UE from 5GMM-IDLE mode or 5GMM-IDLE mode with suspend indication to 5GMM-CONNECTED mode;

5) 5GMM receives a request to re-establish the user-plane resources for an existing PDU session;

6) 5GMM is notified that an uplink user data packet is to be sent for a PDU session with suspended user-plane resources;

7) 5GMM receives a request from upper layers to send a mobile originated location request unless the request triggered a service request procedure to transition the UE from 5GMM-IDLE mode or 5GMM-IDLE mode with suspend indication to 5GMM-CONNECTED mode; and

8) 5GMM receives a request from upper layers to send a mobile originated signalling transaction towards the PCF by sending an UL NAS TRANSPORT message including a UE policy container (see 3GPPTS24.587[19B]) unless the request triggered a service request procedure to transition the UE from 5GMM-IDLE mode to 5GMM-CONNECTED mode.

NOTE2: 5GMM specific procedures initiated by NAS in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode or 5GMM-CONNECTED mode with RRC inactive indication are not subject to access control, e.g. a registration procedure after PS handover will not be prevented by access control (see subclause5.5).

NOTE3: LPP messages or location event report messages transported in the UL NAS TRANSPORT message sent in response to a mobile terminating or network induced location request, and the corresponding access attempts are handled as MT access.

NOTE4: Initiating a mobile originated signalling transaction towards the UDM by sending an UL NAS TRANSPORT message including an SOR transparent container is not supported. Therefore, access control for these cases has not been specified.

When the NAS detects one of the above events, the NAS needs to perform the mapping of the kind of request to one or more access identities and one access category and lower layers will perform access barring checks for that request based on the determined access identities and access category.

NOTE5: The NAS is aware of the above events through indications provided by upper layers or through determining the need to start 5GMM procedures through normal NAS behaviour, or both.

To determine the access identities and the access category for a request, the NAS checks the reason for access, types of service requested and profile of the UE including UE configurations, against a set of access identities and access categories defined in 3GPPTS22.261[3], namely:

a) a set of standardized access identities;

b) a set of standardized access categories; and

c) a set of operator-defined access categories, if available.

For the purpose of determining the applicable access identities from the set of standardized access identities defined in 3GPPTS22.261[3], the NAS shall follow the requirements set out in:

a) subclause4.5.2 and the rules and actions defined in table4.5.2.1, if the UE is not operating in SNPN access mode; or

b) subclause4.5.2A and the rules and actions defined in table4.5.2A.1, if the UE is operating in SNPN access mode.

In order to enable access barring checks for access attempts identified by lower layers in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode with RRC inactive indication, the UE provides the applicable access identities to lower layers.

NOTE6: When and how the NAS provides the applicable access identities to lower layers is UE implementation specific.

NOTE7: Although the UE operating as an IAB-node skips the access control checks, the UE provides the applicable access identities to lower layers for access attempts identified by lower layers in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode with RRC inactive indication.

For the purpose of determining the applicable access category from the set of standardized access categories and operator-defined access categories defined in 3GPPTS22.261[3], the NAS shall follow the requirements set out in:

a) subclause4.5.2 and the rules and actions defined in table4.5.2.2, if the UE is not operating in SNPN access mode; or

b) subclause4.5.2A and the rules and actions defined in table4.5.2A.2, if the UE is operating in SNPN access mode.

4.5.2 Determination of the access identities and access category associated with a request for access for UEs not operating in SNPN access mode

When the UE needs to initiate an access attempt in one of the events listed in subclause4.5.1, the UE shall determine one or more access identities from the set of standardized access identities, and one access category from the set of standardized access categories and operator-defined access categories, to be associated with that access attempt.

The set of the access identities applicable for the request is determined by the UE in the following way:

a) for each of the access identities 1, 2, 3, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15 in table4.5.2.1, the UE shall check whether the access identity is applicable in the selected PLMN, if a new PLMN is selected, or otherwise if it is applicable in the RPLMN or equivalent PLMN; and

b) if none of the above access identities is applicable, then access identity 0 is applicable.

Table4.5.2.1: Access identities

Access Identity number

UE configuration

0

UE is not configured with any parameters from this table

1 (NOTE 1)

UE is configured for multimedia priority service (MPS).

2 (NOTE 2)

UE is configured for mission critical service (MCS).

3 (NOTE 4)

UE for which a disaster condition applies

4-10

Reserved for future use

11 (NOTE 3)

Access Class 11 is configured in the UE.

12 (NOTE 3)

Access Class 12 is configured in the UE.

13 (NOTE 3)

Access Class 13 is configured in the UE.

14 (NOTE 3)

Access Class 14 is configured in the UE.

15 (NOTE 3)

Access Class 15 is configured in the UE.

NOTE 1: Access identity 1 is valid when:
- the USIM file EFUAC_AIC indicates the UE is configured for access identity 1 and the selected PLMN, if a new PLMN is selected, or RPLMN is the HPLMN (if the EHPLMN list is not present or is empty) or EHPLMN (if the EHPLMN list is present), or a visited PLMN of the home country (see the definition of home country in 3GPPTS24.301[15]); 
- the UE receives the 5GS network feature support IE with the MPS indicator bit set to "Access identity 1 valid" from the RPLMN as described in subclause5.5.1.2.4 and subclause5.5.1.3.4; or
- the UE receives the Priority indicator IE with the MPS indicator bit set to "Access identity 1 valid" from the RPLMN as described in subclause5.4.4.3.

NOTE 2: Access identity 2 is used by UEs configured for MCS and is valid when:
- the USIM file EFUAC_AIC indicates the UE is configured for access identity 2 and the selected PLMN, if a new PLMN is selected, or RPLMN is the HPLMN (if the EHPLMN list is not present or is empty) or EHPLMN (if the EHPLMN list is present), or a visited PLMN of the home country (see 3GPPTS23.122[5]); or
- the UE receives the 5GS network feature support IE with the MCS indicator bit set to "Access identity 2 valid" from the RPLMN as described in subclause5.5.1.2.4 and subclause5.5.1.3.4.

NOTE 3: Access identities 11 and 15 are valid in HPLMN (if the EHPLMN list is not present or is empty) or EHPLMN (if the EHPLMN list is present). Access Identities 12, 13 and 14 are valid in HPLMN and visited PLMNs of home country only (see the definition of home country in 3GPPTS24.301[15]).

NOTE 4: Access Identity 3 is valid when the UE is registering or registered for disaster roaming services (see 3GPPTS23.122[5]).



The UE uses the MPS indicator bit of the 5GS network feature support IE or the Priority indicator IE to determine if access identity 1 is valid. Processing of the MPS indicator bit of the 5GS network feature support IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message is described in subclause5.5.1.2.4 and subclause5.5.1.3.4. Processing of the MPS indicator bit of the Priority indicator IE in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message is described in subclause5.4.4.3. The UE shall not consider access identity 1 to be valid when the UE is not in the country of its HPLMN or in an EHPLMN (if the EHPLMN list is present) prior to receiving the MPS indicator bit of the 5GS network feature support IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message or of the Priority indicator IE in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message being set to "Access identity 1 valid".

When the UE is in the country of its HPLMN or in an EHPLMN (if the EHPLMN list is present), the contents of the USIM file EFUAC_AIC as specified in 3GPPTS31.102[22] and the rules specified in table4.5.2.1 are used to determine the applicability of access identity 1. When the UE is in the country of its HPLMN or in an EHPLMN (if the EHPLMN list is present), and the USIM file EFUAC_AIC does not indicate the UE is configured for access identity 1, the UE uses the MPS indicator bit of the 5GS network feature support IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message or of the Priority indicator IE in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message to determine if access identity 1 is valid. When the UE is in the country of its HPLMN or in an EHPLMN (if the EHPLMN list is present), and the USIM file EFUAC_AIC indicates the UE is configured for access identity 1, the MPS indicator bit of the 5GS network feature support IE and the Priority indicator IE are not applicable. When the UE is not in the country of its HPLMN or in an EHPLMN (if the EHPLMN list is present), the contents of the USIM file EFUAC_AIC are not applicable.

The UE uses the MCS indicator bit of the 5GS network feature support IE to determine if access identity 2 is valid. Processing of the MCS indicator bit of the 5GS network feature support IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message is described in subclause5.5.1.2.4 and subclause5.5.1.3.4. The UE shall not consider access identity 2 to be valid when the UE is not in the country of its HPLMN or in an EHPLMN (if the EHPLMN list is present) prior to receiving the MCS indicator bit of the 5GS network feature support IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message being set to "Access identity 2 valid".

When the UE is in the country of its HPLMN or in an EHPLMN (if the EHPLMN list is present), the contents of the USIM file EFUAC_AIC as specified in 3GPPTS31.102[22] and the rules specified in table4.5.2.1 are used to determine the applicability of access identity 2. When the UE is in the country of its HPLMN or in an EHPLMN (if the EHPLMN list is present), and the USIM file EFUAC_AIC does not indicate the UE is configured for access identity 2, the UE uses the MCS indicator bit of the 5GS network feature support IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message to determine if access identity 2 is valid. When the UE is in the country of its HPLMN or in an EHPLMN (if the EHPLMN list is present), and the USIM file EFUAC_AIC indicates the UE is configured for access identity 2, the MCS indicator bit of the 5GS network feature support IE is not applicable. When the UE is not in the country of its HPLMN or in an EHPLMN (if the EHPLMN list is present), the contents of the USIM file EFUAC_AIC are not applicable.

The UE checks the conditions specified in subclause4.4.3.1.1 of 3GPPTS23.122[5] to determine if access identity 3 is valid, and the applicability of access identity 3.

When the UE is in its HPLMN (if the EHPLMN list is not present or is empty) or in an EHPLMN (if the EHPLMN list is present), the contents of the USIM file EFACC as specified in 3GPPTS31.102[22] and the rules specified in table4.5.2.1 are used to determine the applicability of access classes 11 and 15. When the UE is not in its HPLMN (if the EHPLMN list is not present or is empty) or in an EHPLMN (if the EHPLMN list is present), access classes 11 and 15 are not applicable.

When the UE is in the country of its HPLMN, the contents of the USIM file EFACC as specified in 3GPPTS31.102[22] and the rules specified in table4.5.2.1 are used to determine the applicability of access classes 12 - 14. When the UE is not in the country of its HPLMN, access classes 12-14 are not applicable.

In order to determine the access category applicable for the access attempt, the NAS shall check the rules in table4.5.2.2, and use the access category for which there is a match for barring check. If the access attempt matches more than one rule, the access category of the lowest rule number shall be selected. If the access attempt matches more than one operator-defined access category definition, the UE shall select the access category from the operator-defined access category definition with the lowest precedence value (see subclause4.5.3).

NOTE: The case when an access attempt matches more than one rule includes the case when multiple events trigger an access attempt at the same time.

Table4.5.2.2: Mapping table for access categories

Rule #

Type of access attempt

Requirements to be met

Access Category

1

Response to paging or NOTIFICATION over non-3GPP access;

5GMM connection management procedure initiated for the purpose of transporting an LPP message without an ongoing 5GC-MO-LR procedure;

Access attempt to handover of ongoing MMTEL voice call, MMTEL video call or SMSoIP from non-3GPP access; or

Access attempt upon receipt of "call-pull-initiated" indication from the upper layers (see 3GPPTS24.174[13D])

Access attempt is for MT access, or handover of ongoing MMTEL voice call, MMTEL video call or SMSoIP from non-3GPP access; or
Access attempt is made upon receipt of "call-pull-initiated" (3GPPTS24.174[13D])

0 (= MT_acc)


2

Emergency

UE is attempting access for an emergency session (NOTE1, NOTE2)

2 (= emergency)

3

Access attempt for operator-defined access category

UE stores operator-defined access category definitions valid in the current PLMN as specified in subclause4.5.3, and access attempt is matching criteria of an operator-defined access category definition

32-63 
(= based on operator classification)

3.1

Access attempt for MO exception data

UE is in NB-N1 mode and allowed to use exception data reporting (see the ExceptionDataReportingAllowed leaf of the NAS configuration MO in 3GPPTS24.368[17] or the USIM file EFNASCONFIG in 3GPPTS31.102[22]), and access attempt is for MO data or for MO signalling initiated upon receiving a request from upper layers to transmit user data related to an exceptional event.

10 (= MO exception data)

4

Access attempt for delay tolerant service

(a) UE is configured for NAS signalling low priority or UE supporting S1 mode is configured for EAB (see the "ExtendedAccessBarring" leaf of NAS configuration MO in 3GPPTS24.368[17] or 3GPPTS31.102[22]) where "EAB override" does not apply, and

(b): the UE received one of the categories a, b or c as part of the parameters for unified access control in the broadcast system information, and the UE is a member of the broadcasted category in the selected PLMN or RPLMN/equivalent PLMN

(NOTE3, NOTE5, NOTE6, NOTE7, NOTE8)

1 (= delay tolerant)

5

MO MMTel voice call

Access attempt is for MO MMTel voice call

or for NAS signalling connection recovery during ongoing MO MMTel voice call (NOTE2)

4 (= MO MMTel voice)


6

MO MMTel video call

Access attempt is for MO MMTel video call

or for NAS signalling connection recovery during ongoing MO MMTel video call (NOTE2)

5 (= MO MMTel video)


7

MO SMS over NAS or MO SMSoIP

Access attempt is for MO SMS over NAS (NOTE4) or MO SMS over SMSoIP transfer

or for NAS signalling connection recovery during ongoing MO SMS or SMSoIP transfer (NOTE2)

6 (= MO SMS and SMSoIP)


7.1

MO IMS registration related signalling

Access attempt is for MO IMS registration related signalling (e.g. IMS initial registration, re-registration, subscription refresh)

or for NAS signalling connection recovery during ongoing procedure for MO IMS registration related signalling (NOTE2a)

9 (= MO IMS registration related signalling)

8

UE NAS initiated 5GMM specific procedures

Access attempt is for MO signalling

3 (= MO_sig)

8.1

Mobile originated location request

Access attempt is for mobile originated location request (NOTE9)

3 (= MO_sig)

8.2

Mobile originated signalling transaction towards the PCF

Access attempt is for mobile originated signalling transaction towards the PCF (NOTE10)

3 (= MO_sig)

9

UE NAS initiated 5GMM connection management procedure or 5GMM NAS transport procedure

Access attempt is for MO data

7 (= MO_data)

10

An uplink user data packet is to be sent for a PDU session with suspended user-plane resources

No further requirement is to be met

7 (= MO_data)

NOTE1: This includes 5GMM specific procedures while the service is ongoing and 5GMM connection management procedures required to establish a PDU session with request type = "initial emergency request" or "existing emergency PDU session", or to re-establish user-plane resources for such a PDU session. This further includes the service request procedure initiated with a SERVICE REQUEST message with the Service type IE set to "emergency services fallback".

NOTE2: Access for the purpose of NAS signalling connection recovery during an ongoing service as defined in subclause4.5.5, or for the purpose of NAS signalling connection establishment following fallback indication from lower layers during an ongoing service as defined in subclause4.5.5, is mapped to the access category of the ongoing service in order to derive an RRC establishment cause, but barring checks will be skipped for this access attempt.

NOTE2a: Access for the purpose of NAS signalling connection recovery during an ongoing procedure for MO IMS registration related signalling as defined in subclause4.5.5, or for the purpose of NAS signalling connection establishment following fallback indication from lower layers during an ongoing procedure for MO IMS registration related signalling as defined in subclause4.5.5, is mapped to the access category of the MO IMS registration related signalling in order to derive an RRC establishment cause, but barring checks will be skipped for this access attempt.

NOTE3: If the UE selects a new PLMN, then the selected PLMN is used to check the membership; otherwise the UE uses the RPLMNor a PLMN equivalent to the RPLMN.

NOTE4: This includes the 5GMM connection management procedures triggered by the UE-initiated NAS transport procedure for transporting the MO SMS.

NOTE5: The UE configured for NAS signalling low priority is not supported in this release of specification. If a UE supporting both S1 mode and N1 mode is configured for NAS signalling low priority in S1 mode as specified in 3GPPTS24.368[17] or 3GPPTS31.102[22], the UE shall ignore the configuration for NAS signalling low priority when in N1 mode.

NOTE6: If the access category applicable for the access attempt is 1, then the UE shall additionally determine a second access category from the range 3 to 7. If more than one access category matches, the access category of the lowest rule number shall be chosen. The UE shall use the second access category only to derive an RRC establishment cause for the access attempt.

NOTE7: "EAB override" does not apply, if the UE is not configured to allow overriding EAB (see the "Override_ExtendedAccessBarring" leaf of NAS configuration MO in 3GPPTS24.368[17] or 3GPPTS31.102[22]), or if NAS has not received an indication from the upper layers to override EAB and the UE does not have a PDU session that was established with EAB override.

NOTE8: For the definition of categories a, b and c associated with access category 1, see 3GPPTS22.261[3]. The categories associated with access category 1 are distinct from the categories a, b and c associated with EAB (see 3GPPTS22.011[1A]).

NOTE9: This includes:
a) the UE-initiated NAS transport procedure for transporting a mobile originated location
 request;
b) the 5GMM connection management procedure triggered by a) above; and
c) NAS signalling connection recovery during an ongoing 5GC-MO-LR procedure.

NOTE10: This includes:
a) the UE-initiated NAS transport procedure for transporting a mobile originated signalling
 transaction towards the PCF;
b) the 5GMM connection management procedure triggered by a) above; and
c) NAS signalling connection recovery during an ongoing UE-requested  policy provisioning procedure for V2XP, ProSeP or both (see 3GPPTS24.587[19B] and see 3GPPTS24.554[19E]).




4.5.2A Determination of the access identities and access category associated with a request for access for UEs operating in SNPN access mode

When the UE needs to initiate an access attempt in one of the events listed in subclause4.5.1, the UE shall determine one or more access identities from the set of standardized access identities, and one access category from the set of standardized access categories and operator-defined access categories, to be associated with that access attempt.

The set of the access identities applicable for the request is determined by the UE in the following way:

a) for each of the access identities 1, 2, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15 in table4.5.2A.1, the UE shall check whether the access identity is applicable in the selected SNPN, if a new SNPN is selected, or otherwise if it is applicable in the RSNPN; and

b) if none of the above access identities is applicable, then access identity 0 is applicable.

Table4.5.2A.1: Access identities

Access Identity number

UE configuration

0

UE is not configured with any parameters from this table

1 (NOTE 1)

UE is configured for multimedia priority service (MPS).

2 (NOTE 2)

UE is configured for mission critical service (MCS).

3-10

Reserved for future use

11 (NOTE 3)

Access Class 11 is configured in the UE.

12 (NOTE 3)

Access Class 12 is configured in the UE.

13 (NOTE 3)

Access Class 13 is configured in the UE.

14 (NOTE 3)

Access Class 14 is configured in the UE.

15 (NOTE 3)

Access Class 15 is configured in the UE.

NOTE 1: Access identity 1 is valid when:
- the unified access control configuration in the "list of subscriber data" stored in the ME (see 3GPPTS23.122[5]), if an entry of "list of subscriber data" is selected, or in the USIM (see 3GPPTS31.102[22]), if the PLMN subscription is selected, indicates the UE is configured for access identity 1 in the selected SNPN, if a new SNPN is selected, or RSNPN; 
- the UE receives the 5GS network feature support IE with the MPS indicator bit set to "Access identity 1 valid" from the RSNPN as described in subclause5.5.1.2.4 and subclause5.5.1.3.4; or
- the UE receives the Priority indicator IE with the MPS indicator bit set to "Access identity 1 valid" from the RPLMN as described in subclause5.4.4.3.

NOTE 2: Access identity 2 is used by UEs configured for MCS and is valid when:
- the unified access control configuration in the "list of subscriber data" stored in the ME (see 3GPPTS23.122[5]), if an entry of "list of subscriber data" is selected, or in the USIM (see 3GPPTS31.102[22]), if the PLMN subscription is selected, indicates the UE is configured for access identity 2 in the selected SNPN, if a new SNPN is selected, or RSNPN; or
- the UE receives the 5GS network feature support IE with the MCS indicator bit set to "Access identity 2 valid" from the RSNPN as described in subclause5.5.1.2.4 and subclause5.5.1.3.4.

NOTE 3: Access identities 11 to 15 are valid if indicated as configured for the UE in the unified access control configuration in the "list of subscriber data" stored in the ME (see 3GPPTS23.122[5]), if an entry of "list of subscriber data" is selected, or in the USIM (see 3GPPTS31.102[22]), if the PLMN subscription is selected, in the selected SNPN, if a new SNPN is selected, or RSNPN.



The contents of the unified access control configuration in the "list of subscriber data" stored in the ME (see 3GPPTS23.122[5]), if an entry of "list of subscriber data" is selected, or in the USIM (see 3GPPTS31.102[22]), if the PLMN subscription is selected, and the rules specified in table4.5.2A.1 are used to determine the applicability of access identity 1 in the SNPN. When the contents of the unified access control configuration in the "list of subscriber data" stored in the ME (see 3GPPTS23.122[5]), if an entry of "list of subscriber data" is selected, or in the USIM (see 3GPPTS31.102[22]), if the PLMN subscription is selected, do not indicate the UE is configured for access identity 1 for the SNPN, the UE uses the MPS indicator bit of the 5GS network feature support IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message and the MPS indicator bit of the Priority indicator IE in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message to determine if access identity 1 is valid.

The contents of the unified access control configuration in the "list of subscriber data" stored in the ME (see 3GPPTS23.122[5]), if an entry of "list of subscriber data" is selected, or in the USIM (see 3GPPTS31.102[22]), if the PLMN subscription is selected, and the rules specified in table4.5.2A.1 are used to determine the applicability of access identity 2 in the SNPN. When the contents of the unified access control configuration in the "list of subscriber data" stored in the ME (see 3GPPTS23.122[5]), if an entry of "list of subscriber data" is selected, or in the USIM (see 3GPPTS31.102[22]), if the PLMN subscription is selected, do not indicate the UE is configured for access identity 2 for the SNPN, the UE uses the MCS indicator bit of the 5GS network feature support IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message to determine if access identity 2 is valid.

The contents of the unified access control configuration in the "list of subscriber data" stored in the ME (see 3GPPTS23.122[5]), if an entry of "list of subscriber data" is selected, or in the USIM (see 3GPPTS31.102[22]), if the PLMN subscription is selected, and the rules specified in table4.5.2A.1 are used to determine the applicability of access classes 11 to 15 in the SNPN.

In order to determine the access category applicable for the access attempt, the NAS shall check the rules in table4.5.2A.2, and use the access category for which there is a match for barring check. If the access attempt matches more than one rule, the access category of the lowest rule number shall be selected. If the access attempt matches more than one operator-defined access category definition, the UE shall select the access category from the operator-defined access category definition with the lowest precedence value (see subclause4.5.3).

NOTE: The case when an access attempt matches more than one rule includes the case when multiple events trigger an access attempt at the same time.

Table4.5.2A.2: Mapping table for access categories

Rule #

Type of access attempt

Requirements to be met

Access Category

1

Response to paging or NOTIFICATION over non-3GPP access (NOTE11);

5GMM connection management procedure initiated for the purpose of transporting an LPP message without an ongoing 5GC-MO-LR procedure;

Access attempt to handover of MMTEL voice call, MMTEL video call or SMSoIP from non-3GPP access;

Access attempt upon receipt of "call-pull-initiated" indication from the upper layers (see 3GPPTS24.174[13D])

Access attempt is for MT access, handover of ongoing MMTEL voice call, MMTEL video call or SMSoIP from non-3GPP access; or

Access attempt is made upon receipt of "call-pull-initiated" indication (3GPPTS24.174[13D])

0 (= MT_acc)


2

Emergency

UE is attempting access for an emergency session (NOTE1, NOTE2)

2 (= emergency)

3

Access attempt for operator-defined access category

UE stores operator-defined access category definitions valid in the SNPN as specified in subclause4.5.3, and access attempt is matching criteria of an operator-defined access category definition

32-63 
(= based on operator classification)

4

Access attempt for delay tolerant service

(a) UE is configured for NAS signalling low priority, and

(b) the UE received one of the categories a, b or c as part of the parameters for unified access control in the broadcast system information, and the UE is a member of the broadcasted category in the selected SNPN or RSNPN

(NOTE3, NOTE5, NOTE6, NOTE7, NOTE8)

1 (= delay tolerant)

5

MO MMTel voice call

Access attempt is for MO MMTel voice call

or for NAS signalling connection recovery during ongoing MO MMTel voice call (NOTE2)

4 (= MO MMTel voice)


6

MO MMTel video call

Access attempt is for MO MMTel video call

or for NAS signalling connection recovery during ongoing MO MMTel video call (NOTE2)

5 (= MO MMTel video)


7

MO SMS over NAS or MO SMSoIP

Access attempt is for MO SMS over NAS (NOTE4) or MO SMS over SMSoIP transfer

or for NAS signalling connection recovery during ongoing MO SMS or SMSoIP transfer (NOTE2)

6 (= MO SMS and SMSoIP)


7.1

MO IMS registration related signalling

Access attempt is for MO IMS registration related signalling (e.g. IMS initial registration, re-registration, subscription refresh)

or for NAS signalling connection recovery during ongoing procedure for MO IMS registration related signalling (NOTE2a)

9 (= MO IMS registration related signalling)

8

UE NAS initiated 5GMM specific procedures

Access attempt is for MO signalling

3 (= MO_sig)

8.1

Mobile originated location request

Access attempt is for mobile originated location request (NOTE9)

3 (= MO_sig)

8.2

Mobile originated signalling transaction towards the PCF

Access attempt is for mobile originated signalling transaction towards the PCF (NOTE10)

3 (= MO_sig)

9

UE NAS initiated 5GMM connection management procedure or 5GMM NAS transport procedure

Access attempt is for MO data

7 (= MO_data)

10

An uplink user data packet is to be sent for a PDU session with suspended user-plane resources

No further requirement is to be met

7 (= MO_data)

NOTE1: Void

NOTE2: Access for the purpose of NAS signalling connection recovery during an ongoing service as defined in subclause4.5.5, or for the purpose of NAS signalling connection establishment following fallback indication from lower layers during an ongoing service as defined in subclause4.5.5, is mapped to the access category of the ongoing service in order to derive an RRC establishment cause, but barring checks will be skipped for this access attempt.

NOTE2a: Access for the purpose of NAS signalling connection recovery during an ongoing MO IMS registration related signalling as defined in subclause 4.5.5, or for the purpose of NAS signalling connection establishment following fallback indication from lower layers during an ongoing MO IMS registration related signalling as defined in subclause 4.5.5, is mapped to the access category of the MO IMS registration related signalling in order to derive an RRC establishment cause, but barring checks will be skipped for this access attempt.

NOTE3: If the UE selects a new SNPN, then the selected SNPN is used to check the membership; otherwise the UE uses the RSNPN.

NOTE4: This includes the 5GMM connection management procedures triggered by the UE-initiated NAS transport procedure for transporting the MO SMS.

NOTE5: The UE configured for NAS signalling low priority is not supported in this release of specification.

NOTE6: If the access category applicable for the access attempt is 1, then the UE shall additionally determine a second access category from the range 3 to 7. If more than one access category matches, the access category of the lowest rule number shall be chosen. The UE shall use the second access category only to derive an RRC establishment cause for the access attempt.

NOTE7: Void.

NOTE8: For the definition of categories a, b and c associated with access category 1, see 3GPPTS22.261[3]. The categories associated with access category 1 are distinct from the categories a, b and c associated with EAB (see 3GPPTS22.011[1A]).

NOTE9: This includes:
a) the UE-initiated NAS transport procedure for transporting a mobile originated location
 request;
b) the 5GMM connection management procedure triggered by a) above; and
c) NAS signalling connection recovery during an ongoing 5GC-MO-LR procedure.

NOTE10: This includes:
a) the UE-initiated NAS transport procedure for transporting a mobile originated signalling
 transaction towards the PCF;
b) the 5GMM connection management procedure triggered by a) above; and
c) NAS signalling connection recovery during an ongoing UE-requested policy provisioning procedure for V2XP or both (see 3GPPTS24.587[19B]).

NOTE11: The term "non-3GPP access" refers to the case when the UE is accessing SNPN services via a PLMN.



4.5.3 Operator-defined access categories

Operator-defined access category definitions can be signalled to the UE using NAS signalling. Each operator-defined access category definition consists of the following parameters:

a) a precedence value which indicates in which order the UE shall evaluate the operator-defined category definition for a match;

b) an operator-defined access category number, i.e. access category number in the 32-63 range that uniquely identifies the access category in the PLMN or SNPN in which the access categories are being sent to the UE;

c) criteria consisting of one or more access category criteria type and associated access category criteria type values. The access category criteria type can be set to one of the following:

1) DNN;

2) Void;

3) OS Id + OS App Id of application triggering the access attempt; or

4) S-NSSAI; and

NOTE1: An access category criteria type can be associated with more than one access category criteria values.

d) optionally, a standardized access category. This standardized access category is used in combination with the access identities of the UE to determine the RRC establishment cause as specified in subclause4.5.6.

If the access attempt is to establish a new PDU session i.e. it is triggered by:

- a request from upper layers to send an UL NAS TRANSPORT message for the purpose of PDU session establishment unless the request triggered a service request procedure to transition the UE from 5GMM-IDLE mode or 5GMM-IDLE mode with suspend indication to 5GMM-CONNECTED mode; or

- a service request procedure to transition the UE from 5GMM-IDLE mode or 5GMM-IDLE mode with suspend indication to 5GMM-CONNECTED mode triggered by a request from upper layers to send an UL NAS TRANSPORT message for the purpose of PDU session establishment,

then:

- the access attempt matches access category criteria type DNN if the DNN requested by the UE during the PDU session establishment procedure matches any of the access criteria type values associated with the access criteria type DNN; and

- the access attempt matches access category criteria type S-NSSAI if the S-NSSAI requested by the UE during the PDU session establishment procedure matches any of the access criteria type values associated with the access criteria type S-NSSAI.

If the access attempt is for an existing PDU session i.e. it is triggered by:

- a request from upper layers to send an UL NAS TRANSPORT message for the purpose of PDU session modification unless the request triggered a service request procedure to transition the UE from 5GMM-IDLE mode or 5GMM-IDLE mode with suspend indication to 5GMM-CONNECTED mode;

- a service request procedure to transition the UE from 5GMM-IDLE mode or 5GMM-IDLE mode with suspend indication to 5GMM-CONNECTED mode triggered by a request from upper layers to send an UL NAS TRANSPORT message for the purpose of PDU session modification;

- a service request procedure to transition the UE from 5GMM-IDLE mode or 5GMM-IDLE mode with suspend indication to 5GMM-CONNECTED mode triggered by a request from upper layers to send an UL NAS TRANSPORT message for the purpose of PDU session release;

- a service request procedure requesting user-plane resources for a PDU session; or

- an uplink user data packet is to be sent for a PDU session with suspended user-plane resources,

then:

- the access attempt matches access category criteria type DNN if the DNN provided by the network in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message matches any of the access criteria type values associated with the access criteria type DNN; and

- the access attempt matches access category criteria type S-NSSAI if the S-NSSAI associated with the PDU session matches any of the access criteria type values associated with the access criteria type S-NSSAI.

An access attempt matches the criteria of an operator-defined access category definition, if the access attempt matches all access category criteria types included in the criteria with any of the associated access criteria type values.

Each operator-defined access category definition has a different precedence value.

Several operator-defined access category definitions can have the same operator-defined access category number.

If:

- an access category in bullet d) is not provided;

- an access category in bullet d) is provided and is not a standardized access category; or

- an access category in bullet d) is provided, is a standardized access category and is not recognized by the UE;

the UE shall use instead access category 7 (MO_data) in combination with the access identities of the UE to determine the RRC establishment cause as specified in subclause4.5.6.

The operator-defined access category definitions are valid in the PLMN which provided them and in a PLMN equivalent to the PLMN which provided them, or in the SNPN which provided them, as specified in annexC.

If the UE stores operator-defined access category definitions valid in the selected PLMN or the RPLMN, or valid in the selected SNPN or RSNPN, then access control in 5GMM-IDLE mode or 5GMM-IDLE mode with suspend indication will only be performed for the event a) defined in subclause4.5.1. If the transition from 5GMM-IDLE mode or 5GMM-IDLE mode with suspend indication over 3GPP access to 5GMM-CONNECTED mode is due to a UE NAS initiated 5GMM specific procedure, then this access attempt shall be mapped to one of the standardized access categories in the range < 32, see subclause4.5.2. I.e. for this case the UE shall skip the checking of operator-defined access category definitions.

If the UE stores operator-defined access category definitions valid in the selected PLMN or the RPLMN, or valid in the selected SNPN or RSNPN, then access control in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode and in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode with RRC inactive indication will only be performed for the events 1) to 8) defined in subclause4.5.1.

The UE shall handle the operator-defined access category definitions stored for the RPLMN or RSNPN as specified in subclause5.4.4.3, subclause5.5.1.2.4, and subclause5.5.1.3.4.

When the UE is switched off, the UE shall keep the operator-defined access category definitions so that the operator-defined access category definitions can be used after switch on.

When the UE selects a new PLMN which is not equivalent to the previously selected PLMN, or selects a new SNPN, the UE shall stop using the operator-defined access category definitions stored for the previously selected PLMN or SNPN and should keep the operator-defined access category definitions stored for the previously selected PLMN or SNPN.

NOTE2: When the UE selects a new PLMN which is not equivalent to the previously selected PLMN, or selects a new SNPN, the UE can delete the operator-defined access category definitions stored for the previously selected PLMN or SNPN e.g. if there is no storage space in the UE.

4.5.4 Access control and checking

4.5.4.1 Access control and checking in 5GMM-IDLE mode and in 5GMM-IDLE mode with suspend indication

When the UE is in 5GMM-IDLE mode or 5GMM-IDLE mode with suspend indication, upon receiving a request from the upper layers for an access attempt, the NAS shall categorize the access attempt into access identities and an access category following:

a) subclause4.5.2, table4.5.2.1 and table4.5.2.2, and subclause4.5.3, if the UE is not operating in SNPN access mode; or

b) subclause4.5.2A, table4.5.2A.1 and table4.5.2A.2, and subclause4.5.3, if the UE is operating in SNPN access mode,

and provide the applicable access identities and the access category to the lower layers for the purpose of access control checking. In this request to the lower layer the NAS can also provide to the lower layer the RRC establishment cause determined as specified in subclause4.5.6 of this specification.

NOTE1: The access barring check is performed by the lower layers.

NOTE2: As an implementation option, the NAS can provide the RRC establishment cause to the lower layers after being informed by the lower layers that the access attempt is allowed.

If the UE has uplink user data pending for one or more PDU sessions when it builds a REGISTRATION REQUEST or SERVICE REQUEST message as initial NAS message, the UE shall indicate the respective PDU sessions in the Uplink data status IE as specified in subclause5.5.1.3.2 and 5.6.1.2.1, regardless of the access category for which the access barring check is performed.

If the UE is registered for 5GS services with control plane CIoT 5GS optimization has uplink user data pending for one or more PDU sessions when it builds a CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message as initial NAS message, the UE shall indicate the respective PDU sessions as specified in subclause5.6.1.2.2, regardless of the access category for which the access barring check is performed.

NOTE3: The UE indicates pending user data for all the respective PDU sessions, even if barring timers are running for some of the corresponding access categories.

If the lower layers indicate that the access attempt is allowed, the NAS shall initiate the procedure to send the initial NAS message for the access attempt.

If the lower layers indicate that the access attempt is barred, the NAS shall not initiate the procedure to send the initial NAS message for the access attempt. Additionally:

a) if the event which triggered the access attempt was an MO-MMTEL-voice-call-started indication or an MO-MMTEL-video-call-started indication:

1) if the UE is operating in the single-registration mode, the UE's usage setting is "voice centric" and the UE has not disabled its E-UTRA capability as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15], the UE may attempt to select an E-UTRA cell connected to EPC. If the UE finds a suitable E-UTRA cell connected to EPC, it then proceeds with the appropriate EMM specific procedures and, if necessary, ESM procedures to make a PDN connection providing access to IMS available; see subclause4.8.2 and 3GPPTS24.301[15];

2) if the UE is operating in the dual-registration mode, the UE may proceed in S1 mode with the appropriate EMM specific procedures and ESM procedures to make a PDN connection providing access to IMS available; see subclause4.8.3 and 3GPPTS24.301[15]; or

3) otherwise, the NAS shall notify the upper layers that the access attempt is barred. In this case, upon receiving an indication from the lower layers that the barring is alleviated for the access category with which the access attempt was associated, the NAS shall notify the upper layers that the barring is alleviated for the access category and may initiate the procedure to send the initial NAS message, if still needed;

b) if the event which triggered the access attempt was an MO-SMSoIP-attempt-started indication or an MO-IMS-registration-related-signalling-started indication:

1) if the UE is operating in the single-registration mode, the UE may attempt to select an E-UTRA cell connected to EPC. If the UE finds a suitable E-UTRA cell connected to EPC, it then proceeds with the appropriate EMM specific procedures and, if necessary, ESM procedures to make a PDN connection providing access to IMS available; see subclause4.8.2 and 3GPPTS24.301[15];

2) if the UE is operating in the dual-registration mode, the UE may proceed in S1 mode with the appropriate EMM specific procedures and ESM procedures to make a PDN connection providing access to IMS available; see subclause4.8.3 and 3GPPTS24.301[15]; or

3) otherwise, the NAS shall notify the upper layers that the access attempt is barred. In this case, upon receiving an indication from the lower layers that the barring is alleviated for the access category with which the access attempt was associated, the NAS shall notify the upper layers that the barring is alleviated for the access category and may initiate the procedure to send the initial NAS message, if still needed; and

c) if the access attempt is for emergency:

1) the NAS shall notify the upper layers that the access attempt is barred. In this case, upon receiving an indication from the lower layers that the barring is alleviated for the access category with which the access attempt was associated, the NAS shall notify the upper layers of that the barring is alleviated for the access category and may initiate the procedure to send the initial NAS message, if still needed.

NOTE4: This can result in the upper layers requesting another emergency call attempt using domain selection as specified in 3GPPTS23.167[6] and 3GPPTS24.229[14].

NOTE5: Barring timers, on a per access category basis, are run by the lower layers. At expiry of barring timers, the indication of alleviation of access barring is indicated to the NAS on a per access category basis.

4.5.4.2 Access control and checking in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode and in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode with RRC inactive indication

When the UE is in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode or 5GMM-CONNECTED mode with RRC inactive indication, upon detecting one of events 1) through 8) listed in subclause4.5.1, the NAS shall categorize the corresponding access attempt into access identities and an access category following:

a) subclause4.5.2, table4.5.2.1 and table4.5.2.2, and subclause4.5.3, if the UE is not operating in SNPN access mode; or

b) subclause4.5.2A, table4.5.2A.1 and table4.5.2A.2, and subclause4.5.3, if the UE is operating in SNPN access mode,

and provide the access identities and the access category to the lower layers for the purpose of access control checking. In this request to the lower layer the NAS can also provide to the lower layer the RRC establishment cause determined as specified in subclause4.5.6 of this specification.

NOTE1: As an implementation option, the NAS can provide the RRC establishment cause to the lower layers after being informed by the lower layers that the access attempt is allowed.

If the UE has uplink user data pending for one or more PDU sessions when it builds a REGISTRATION REQUEST or SERVICE REQUEST message for the access attempt, the UE shall indicate the respective PDU sessions in the Uplink data status IE as specified in subclause5.5.1.3.2 and 5.6.1.2, regardless of the access category for which the access barring check is performed.

NOTE2: The UE indicates pending user data for all the respective PDU sessions, even if barring timers are running for some of the corresponding access categories.

If the lower layers indicate that the access attempt is allowed, the NAS shall take the following action depending on the event which triggered the access attempt:

a) if the event which triggered the access attempt was an MO-MMTEL-voice-call-started indication, an MO-MMTEL-video-call-started indication, an MO-SMSoIP-attempt-started indication, or an MO-IMS-registration-related-signalling-started indication, the NAS shall notify the upper layers that the access attempt is allowed;

b) if the event which triggered the access attempt was a request from upper layers to send a mobile originated SMS over NAS, 5GMM shall initiate the NAS transport procedure as specified in subclause5.4.5 to send the SMS in an UL NAS TRANSPORT message;

c) if the event which triggered the access attempt was a request from upper layers to establish a new PDU session, 5GMM shall initiate the NAS transport procedure as specified in subclause5.4.5 to send the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message;

d) if the event which triggered the access attempt was a request from upper layers to modify an existing PDU session, 5GMM shall initiate the NAS transport procedure as specified in subclause5.4.5 to send the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message;

e) if the event which triggered the access attempt was a request to re-establish the user-plane resources for an existing PDU session, 5GMM shall initiate the service request procedure as specified in subclause5.6.1;

f) if the event which triggered the access attempt was an uplink user data packet to be sent for a PDU session with suspended user-plane resources, 5GMM shall consider that the uplink user data packet is allowed to be sent;

g) if the event which triggered the access attempt was a request from upper layers to send a mobile originated location request, 5GMM shall initiate the NAS transport procedure as specified in clause5.4.5 to send an LCS message in an UL NAS TRANSPORT message; and

h) if the event which triggered the access attempt was a request from upper layers to send a mobile originated signalling transaction towards the PCF by sending an UL NAS TRANSPORT message including a UE policy container (see 3GPPTS24.587[19B]), 5GMM shall initiate the NAS transport procedure as specified in subclause5.4.5 to send the signalling transaction via an UL NAS TRANSPORT message.

If the lower layers indicate that the access attempt is barred, the NAS shall take the following action depending on the event which triggered the access attempt:

a) if the event which triggered the access attempt was an MO-MMTEL-voice-call-started indication, an MO-MMTEL-video-call-started indication or an MO-SMSoIP-attempt-started indication, or an MO-IMS-registration-related-signalling-started indication:

1) if the UE is operating in the dual-registration mode, the UE may proceed in S1 mode with the appropriate EMM specific procedures and ESM procedures to make a PDN connection providing access to IMS available; see subclause4.8.3 and 3GPPTS24.301[15];

2) otherwise, the NAS shall notify the upper layers that the access attempt is barred. In this case, upon receiving an indication from the lower layers that the barring is alleviated for the access category with which the access attempt was associated, the NAS shall notify the upper layers that the barring is alleviated for the access category;

NOTE3: In this case prohibiting the initiation of the MMTEL voice session, MMTEL video session or prohibiting sending of the SMS over IP or the IMS registration related signalling is performed by the upper layers.

b) if the event which triggered the access attempt was a request from upper layers to send a mobile originated SMS over NAS, 5GMM shall not initiate the NAS transport procedure as specified in subclause5.4.5 to send the SMS in an UL NAS TRANSPORT message. Upon receiving an indication from the lower layers that the barring is alleviated for the access category with which the access attempt was associated, 5GMM may initiate the NAS transport procedure as specified in subclause5.4.5 to send the SMS in an UL NAS TRANSPORT message, if still needed;

c) if the event which triggered the access attempt was a request from upper layers to establish a new PDU session, 5GMM shall not initiate the NAS transport procedure to send the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message. Upon receiving an indication from the lower layers that the barring is alleviated for the access category with which the access attempt was associated, the NAS may initiate the NAS transport procedure as specified in subclause5.4.5, if still needed;

d) if the event which triggered the access attempt was a request from upper layers to modify an existing PDU session modification, 5GMM shall not initiate the NAS transport procedure to send the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message. Upon receiving an indication from the lower layers that the barring is alleviated for the access category with which the access attempt was associated, the NAS may initiate the NAS transport procedure as specified in subclause5.4.5, if still needed;

e) if the event which triggered the access attempt was a request to re-establish the user-plane resources for an existing PDU session, the NAS shall not initiate the service request procedure as specified in subclause5.6.1. Upon receiving an indication from the lower layers that the barring is alleviated for the access category with which the access attempt was associated, the NAS may initiate the service request procedure as specified in subclause5.6.1, if still needed;

f) if the event which triggered the access attempt was an uplink user data packet to be sent for a PDU session with suspended user-plane resources, 5GMM shall consider that the uplink user data packet is not allowed to be sent. Upon receiving an indication from the lower layers that the barring is alleviated for the access category with which the access attempt was associated, the NAS shall consider that the barring is alleviated for the access category;

g) if the event which triggered the access attempt was a request from upper layers to send a mobile originated location request, 5GMM shall not initiate the NAS transport procedure as specified in clause5.4.5 to send an LCS message in an UL NAS TRANSPORT message. Upon receiving an indication from the lower layers that the barring is alleviated for the access category with which the access attempt was associated, 5GMM may initiate the NAS transport procedure as specified in clause5.4.5 to send the LCS message in an UL NAS TRANSPORT message, if still needed; and

h) if the event which triggered the access attempt was a request from upper layers to send a mobile originated signalling transaction towards the PCF by sending an UL NAS TRANSPORT message including a UE policy container (see 3GPPTS24.587[19B]), 5GMM shall not initiate the NAS transport procedure as specified in subclause5.4.5 to send the mobile originated signalling transaction via an UL NAS TRANSPORT message. Upon receiving an indication from the lower layers that the barring is alleviated for the access category with which the access attempt was associated, 5GMM may initiate the NAS transport procedure as specified in subclause5.4.5 to send the mobile originated signalling transaction via an UL NAS TRANSPORT message, if still needed.

4.5.5 Exception handling and avoiding double barring

Access attempts are allowed to proceed without further access control checking in order to avoid double barring for any service request or registration procedure initiated for the purpose of NAS signalling connection recovery or following a fallback indication from the lower layers (see subclauses5.3.1.2 and 5.3.1.4).

NOTE1: The case of NAS signalling connection recovery also includes the cases where the UE was in S1 mode when the RRC connection failure occurred.

For any service request or registration procedure of this kind the UE determines an access category as specified in subclause4.5.1 and 4.5.2 or 4.5.2A, unless a different access category is specified in the rest of the present subclause.

NOTE2: Although the access control checking is skipped, the access category is determined for the specific access attempt in order to derive an RRC establishment cause.

There are several services or an MO IMS registration related signalling for which the NAS needs to be informed when the service starts and stops,

- because, while the service is ongoing or the MO IMS registration related signalling is ongoing, the mapping of other access attempts to a specific access category can be affected; and

- in order to avoid double barring at the start of these services or at the start of the MO IMS registration related signalling.

These services are:

a) emergency service;

b) MMTEL voice;

c) MMTEL video;

d) SMSoIP;

e) SMS over NAS;

f) 5GC-MO-LR procedure;

g) UE-requested policy provisioning procedure for V2XP, ProSeP or both; and

h) CIoT user data transfer over the control plane.

The UE considers an emergency service a) as started when 5GMM receives a request from upper layers to register for emergency services or to establish a PDU session with request type = "initial emergency request" or "existing emergency PDU session". It considers the emergency service as stopped when this PDU session is released.

In addition, the UE considers an emergency service a) as started when the 5GMM receives a request from the upper layers to perform emergency services fallback and performs emergency services fallback as specified in subclause4.13.4.2 of 3GPPTS23.502[9]. In this case, the UE considers the emergency service as stopped when:

- the emergency PDU session established during the emergency services fallback is released if the UE has moved to an E-UTRA cell connected to 5GCN; or

- the service request procedure involved in the emergency services fallback is completed otherwise.

While an emergency service a) is ongoing, any access attempt triggered by the initiation of a registration, de-registration or service request procedure or by an uplink user data packet to be sent for a PDU session with suspended user-plane resources is mapped to access category 2 = emergency.

Once the emergency service has successfully passed access control, then as long as the service is ongoing, the following access attempts are allowed to proceed without further access control checking in order to avoid double barring:

- any service request procedure related to the PDU session associated with request type = "initial emergency request" or "existing emergency PDU session"; and

- any uplink user data packet to be sent for a PDU session with suspended user-plane resources associated with request type = "initial emergency request" or "existing emergency PDU session".

NOTE3: Although the access control checking is skipped, the mapping is performed in order to derive an RRC establishment cause.

For services b) to h) the 5GMM receives explicit start and stop indications from the upper layers.

For the case of handover of ongoing services b) to d) from non-3GPP access, the 5GMM receives an additional explicit handover of ongoing service from non-3GPP access indication from the upper layers. 

The 5GMM may receive an additional explicit "call-pull-initiated" indication from the upper layers (see 3GPPTS24.174[13D]).

Once the service has successfully passed access control, then as long as the service is ongoing, the following access attempts are allowed to proceed without further access control checking in order to avoid double barring:

- for services b), c) and d):

1) any service request procedure related to the PDU session established for DNN = "IMS" except between receiving from the lower layers an indication that access barring is applicable for all access categories except categories 0 and 2, or access barring is applicable for all access categories except category 0, and receiving from the lower layers an indication that the barring is alleviated for the access category determined for the access attempt; and

2) any uplink user data packet to be sent for a PDU session with suspended user-plane resources established for DNN = "IMS" except between receiving from the lower layers an indication that access barring is applicable for all access categories except categories 0 and 2, or access barring is applicable for all access categories except category 0, and receiving from the lower layers an indication that the barring is alleviated for the access category determined for the access attempt;

- for service d), if the upper layers have indicated a DNN used for SMSoIP and the indicated DNN used for SMSoIP is different from "IMS":

1) any service request procedure related to the PDU session established for the DNN used for SMSoIP except between receiving from the lower layers an indication that access barring is applicable for all access categories except categories 0 and 2, or access barring is applicable for all access categories except category 0, and receiving from the lower layers an indication that the barring is alleviated for access category 6; and

2) any uplink user data packet to be sent for a PDU session with suspended user-plane resources established for the DNN used for SMSoIP except between receiving from the lower layers an indication that access barring is applicable for all access categories except categories 0 and 2, or access barring is applicable for all access category except category 0, and receiving from the lower layers an indication that the barring is alleviated for access category 6.

For the MO IMS registration related signalling, the 5GMM receives explicit start and stop indications from the upper layers.

Once the MO IMS registration related signalling has successfully passed access control, then as long as the MO IMS registration related signalling is ongoing, the following access attempts are allowed to proceed without further access control checking in order to avoid double barring:

1) any service request procedure related to the PDU session established for DNN = "IMS" and for the DNN used for SMSoIP, if the upper layers have indicated a DNN used for SMSoIP and the indicated DNN used for SMSoIP is different from "IMS", except between receiving from the lower layers an indication that access barring is applicable for all access categories except categories 0 and 2, or access barring is applicable for all access categories except category 0 and receiving from the lower layers an indication that the barring is alleviated for the access category determined for the access attempt; and

2) any uplink user data packet to be sent for a PDU session with suspended user-plane resources established for DNN = "IMS" and for the DNN used for SMSoIP except between receiving from the lower layers an indication that access barring is applicable for all access categories except categories 0 and 2, or access barring is applicable for all access categories except category 0 and receiving from the lower layers an indication that the barring is alleviated for the access category determined for the access attempt;

While an MMTEL voice call is ongoing:

- any service request procedure related to the PDU session established for DNN = "IMS" is mapped to access category 4;

- any uplink user data packet to be sent for a PDU session with suspended user-plane resources established for DNN = "IMS" is mapped to access category 4; and

- any:

1) service request procedure; or

2) registration procedure;

 initiated in 5GMM-IDLE mode or 5GMM-IDLE mode with suspend indication for the purpose of NAS signalling connection recovery or following a fallback indication from the lower layers (see subclause5.3.1.2 and5.3.1.4) is mapped to access category 4.

While an MMTEL video call is ongoing and no MMTEL voice call is ongoing:

- any service request procedure related to the PDU session established for DNN = "IMS" is mapped to access category 5;

- any uplink user data packet to be sent for a PDU session with suspended user-plane resources established for DNN = "IMS" is mapped to access category 5; and

- any:

1) service request procedure; or

2) registration procedure;

 initiated in 5GMM-IDLE mode or 5GMM-IDLE mode with suspend indication for the purpose of NAS signalling connection recovery or following a fallback indication from the lower layers (see subclause5.3.1.2 and5.3.1.4) is mapped to access category 5.

While an SMSoIP is ongoing, no MMTEL video call is ongoing and no MMTEL voice call is ongoing:

- any service request procedure related to the PDU session established:

1) for DNN = "IMS"; or

2) for the DNN used for SMSoIP, if the upper layers have indicated a DNN used for SMSoIP and the indicated DNN used for SMSoIP is different from "IMS";

 is mapped to access category 6; and

- any uplink user data packet to be sent for a PDU session with suspended user-plane resources established:

1) for DNN = "IMS"; or

2) for the DNN used for SMSoIP, if the upper layers have indicated a DNN used for SMSoIP and the indicated DNN used for SMSoIP is different from "IMS";

 is mapped to access category 6; and

- any:

1) service request procedure; or

2) registration procedure;

 initiated in 5GMM-IDLE mode or 5GMM-IDLE mode with suspend indication for the purpose of NAS signalling connection recovery or following a fallback indication from the lower layers (see subclause5.3.1.2 and5.3.1.4) is mapped to access category 6.

While an SMS over NAS is ongoing, no SMSoIP is ongoing, no MMTEL video call is ongoing and no MMTEL voice call is ongoing:

- any:

1) service request procedure; or

2) registration procedure;

 initiated in 5GMM-IDLE mode or 5GMM-IDLE mode with suspend indication for the purpose of NAS signalling connection recovery or following a fallback indication from the lower layers (see subclause5.3.1.2 and5.3.1.4) is mapped to access category 6.

While an MO IMS registration related signalling is ongoing, no SMSoIP is ongoing, no MMTEL video call is ongoing and no MMTEL voice call is ongoing:

- any service request procedure related to the PDU session established:

1) for DNN = "IMS"; and

2) for the DNN used for SMSoIP, if the upper layers have indicated a DNN used for SMSoIP and the indicated DNN used for SMSoIP is different from "IMS";

 is mapped to access category 9; and

- any uplink user data packet to be sent for a PDU session with suspended user-plane resources established:

1) for DNN = "IMS"; and

2) for the DNN used for SMSoIP, if the upper layers have indicated a DNN used for SMSoIP and the indicated DNN used for SMSoIP is different from "IMS";

 is mapped to access category 9; and

- if no SMS over NAS is ongoing, any:

1) service request procedure; or

2) registration procedure;

 initiated in 5GMM-IDLE mode for the purpose of NAS signalling connection recovery or following a fallback indication from the lower layers (see subclause5.3.1.2 and5.3.1.4) is mapped to access category 9.

While a 5GC-MO-LR procedure is ongoing, no SMS over NAS is ongoing, no SMSoIP is ongoing, no MO IMS registration related signalling is ongoing, no MMTEL video call is ongoing, and no MMTEL voice call is ongoing:

- any:

1) service request procedure; or

2) registration procedure;

 initiated in 5GMM-IDLE mode or 5GMM-IDLE mode with suspend indication for the purpose of NAS signalling connection recovery or following a fallback indication from the lower layers (see subclauses5.3.1.2 and5.3.1.4) is mapped to access category 3.

While a UE-requested policy provisioning procedure for V2XP, ProSeP or both (see 3GPPTS24.587[19B] and 3GPPTS24.554[19E]), no 5GC-MO-LR procedure is ongoing, no SMS over NAS is ongoing, no SMSoIP is ongoing, no MMTEL video call is ongoing, and no MMTEL voice call is ongoing:

- any:

1) service request procedure; or

2) registration procedure;

 initiated in 5GMM-IDLE mode for the purpose of NAS signalling connection recovery or following a fallback indication from the lower layers (see subclauses5.3.1.2 and5.3.1.4) is mapped to access category 3.

While CIoT user data transfer over the control plane is ongoing, no 5GC-MO-LR procedure is ongoing, no SMS over NAS is ongoing, no SMSoIP is ongoing, no MMTEL video call is ongoing, and no MMTEL voice call is ongoing, any service request procedure initiated in 5GMM-IDLE mode following a fallback indication from the lower layers (see subclause5.3.1.4) is mapped to access category 7.

NOTE3: Although the access control checking is skipped, the mapping is performed in order to derive an RRC establishment cause.

If an access category is determined and the access control checking is skipped, the NAS shall determine the RRC establishment cause from one or more determined access identities and the access category as specified in subclause4.5.6, the NAS shall initiate the procedure to send the initial NAS message for the access attempt and shall provide the RRC establishment cause to lower layers.

If the UE receives from the lower layers an indication that access barring is applicable for all access categories except categories 0 and 2, or access barring is applicable for all access categories except category 0:

a) if an MMTEL voice call or MMTEL video call is ongoing:

1) if the UE is operating in the single-registration mode and the UE's usage setting is "voice centric", the UE may attempt to select an E-UTRA cell connected to EPC. If the UE finds a suitable E-UTRA cell connected to EPC, it then proceeds with the appropriate EMM specific procedures and, if necessary, ESM procedures to make a PDN connection providing access to IMS available; see subclause4.8.2 and 3GPPTS24.301[15]; and

2) if the UE is operating in the dual-registration mode, the UE may proceed in S1 mode with the appropriate EMM specific procedures and ESM procedures to make a PDN connection providing access to IMS available; see subclause4.8.3 and 3GPPTS24.301[15]; and

b) if SMSoIP is ongoing or an MO IMS registration related signalling is ongoing:

1) if the UE is operating in the single-registration mode, the UE may attempt to select an E-UTRA cell connected to EPC. If the UE finds a suitable E-UTRA cell connected to EPC, it then proceeds with the appropriate EMM specific procedures and, if necessary, ESM procedures to make a PDN connection providing access to IMS available; see subclause4.8.2 and 3GPPTS24.301[15]; and

2) if the UE is operating in the dual-registration mode, the UE may proceed in S1 mode with the appropriate EMM specific procedures and ESM procedures to make a PDN connection providing access to IMS available; see subclause4.8.3 and 3GPPTS24.301[15].

4.5.6 Mapping between access categories/access identities and RRC establishment cause

When 5GMM requests the establishment of a NAS-signalling connection, the RRC establishment cause used by the UE shall be selected according to one or more access identities (see subclauses4.5.2 and 4.5.2A) and the determined access category by checking the rules specified in table4.5.6.1 and table4.5.6.2. If the access attempt matches more than one rule, the RRC establishment cause of the lowest rule number shall be used. If the determined access category is an operator-defined access category, then the RRC establishment cause used by the UE shall be selected according to table4.5.6.1 and table4.5.6.2 based on one or more access identities (see subclauses4.5.2 and 4.5.2A) and the standardized access category determined for the operator-defined access category as described in subclause4.5.3.

NOTE: Following an RRC release with redirection, the lower layers can set the RRC establishment cause to "mpsPriorityAccess" in the case of redirection to an NR cell connected to 5GCN (see 3GPPTS38.331[30]) or to "highPriorityAccess" in the case of redirection to an EUTRA cell connected to 5GCN (see 3GPPTS36.331[25A]), if the network indicates to the UE during RRC connection release with redirection that the UE has an active MPS session.

Table4.5.6.1: Mapping table for access identities/access categories and RRC establishment cause when establishing N1 NAS signalling connection via NR connected to 5GCN

Rule #

Access identities

Access categories

RRC establishment cause is set to

1

1

Any category

mps-PriorityAccess

2

2

Any category

mcs-PriorityAccess

3

11, 15

Any category

highPriorityAccess

4

12,13,14,

Any category

highPriorityAccess

5

0

0 (= MT_acc)

mt-Access





1 (= delay tolerant)

Not applicable (NOTE1)





2 (= emergency)

emergency





3 (= MO_sig)

mo-Signalling





4 (= MO MMTel voice)

mo-VoiceCall





5 (= MO MMTel video)

mo-VideoCall





6 (= MO SMS and SMSoIP)

mo-SMS





7 (= MO_data)

mo-Data





9 (= MO IMS registration related signalling)

mo-Data

NOTE1: A UE using access category 1 for the access barring check will determine a second access category in the range 3 to 7 that is to be used for determination of the RRC establishment cause. See subclause4.5.2, table4.5.2.2, NOTE6.

NOTE2: See subclause4.5.2, table4.5.2.1 for use of the access identities of 0, 1, 2, and 11-15.



Table4.5.6.2: Mapping table for access identities/access categories and RRC establishment cause  when establishing N1 NAS signalling connection via E-UTRA connected to 5GCN

Rule #

Access identities

Access categories

RRC establishment cause is set to

1

1

Any category

highPriorityAccess

2

2

Any category

highPriorityAccess

3

11, 15

Any category

highPriorityAccess

4

12,13,14,

Any category

highPriorityAccess

5

0

0 (= MT_acc)

mt-Access





1 (= delay tolerant)

Not applicable (NOTE1)





2 (= emergency)

emergency





3 (= MO_sig)

mo-Signalling





4 (= MO MMTel voice)

mo-VoiceCall





5 (= MO MMTel video)

mo-VoiceCall





6 (= MO SMS and SMSoIP)

mo-Data





7 (= MO_data)

mo-Data





9 (= MO IMS registration related signalling)

mo-Data





10 (= MO exception data)

mo-ExceptionData (NOTE3)

NOTE1: A UE using access category 1 for the access barring check will determine a second access category in the range 3 to 7 that is to be used for determination of the RRC establishment cause. See subclause4.5.2, table4.5.2.2, NOTE6.

NOTE2: See subclause4.5.2, table4.5.2.1 for use of the access identities of 0, 1, 2, and 11-15.

NOTE3: This applies to the UE in NB-N1 mode.



4.6 Network slicing

4.6.1 General

The 5GS supports network slicing as described in 3GPPTS23.501[8]. Within a PLMN or SNPN, a network slice is identified by an S-NSSAI, which is comprised of a slice/service type (SST) and a slice differentiator (SD). Inclusion of an SD in an S-NSSAI is optional. A set of one or more S-NSSAIs is called the NSSAI. The following NSSAIs are defined in 3GPPTS23.501[8]:

a) configured NSSAI;

b) requested NSSAI;

c) allowed NSSAI;

d) subscribed S-NSSAIs; and

e) pending NSSAI.

The following NSSAIs are defined in the present document:

a) rejected NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN;

b) rejected NSSAI for the current registration area;

c) rejected NSSAI for the failed or revoked NSSAA; and

d) rejected NSSAI for the maximum number of UEs reached.

In roaming scenarios, rejected NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN, or rejected NSSAI for the current registration area, or rejected NSSAI for the maximum number of UEs reached includes one or more S-NSSAI for the current PLMN and also contains a set of mapped S-NSSAI(s) if available. An S-NSSAI included in the rejected NSSAI for the failed or revoked NSSAA is an HPLMN S-NSSAI.

In case of a PLMN, a serving PLMN may configure a UE with the configured NSSAI per PLMN, and NSSRG information if the UE has indicated it support the subscription-based restrictions to simultaneous registration of network slices feature. In addition, the HPLMN may configure a UE with a single default configured NSSAI and consider the default configured NSSAI as valid in a PLMN for which the UE has neither a configured NSSAI nor an allowed NSSAI.

NOTE1: The value(s) used in the default configured NSSAI are expected to be commonly decided by all roaming partners, e.g., values standardized by 3GPP or other bodies.

In case of an SNPN, the SNPN may configure a UE with a configured NSSAI applicable to the SNPN, and NSSRG information if the UE has indicated it support the subscription-based restrictions to simultaneous registration of network slices feature, if the UE is neither registering nor registered for onboarding services in SNPN. In addition, the credential holder may configure a single default configured NSSAI associated with the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the PLMN subscription and consider the default configured NSSAI as valid in a SNPN for which the UE has neither a configured NSSAI nor an allowed NSSAI. If the UE is registering or registered for onboarding services in SNPN, the serving SNPN shall not provide a configured NSSAI to the UE.

The allowed NSSAI and the rejected NSSAI for the current registration area are managed per access type independently, i.e. 3GPP access or non-3GPP access, and is applicable for the registration area. If the UE does not have a valid registration area, the rejected NSSAI for the current registration area is applicable to the tracking area on which it was received. If the registration area contains TAIs belonging to different PLMNs, which are equivalent PLMNs, the allowed NSSAI and the rejected NSSAI for the current registration area are applicable to these PLMNs in this registration area.

The allowed NSSAI that is associated with a registration area containing TAIs belonging to different PLMNs, which are equivalent PLMNs, can be used to form the requested NSSAI for any of the equivalent PLMNs when the UE is outside of the registration area where the allowed NSSAI was received.

When the network slice-specific authentication and authorization procedure is to be initiated for one or more S-NSSAIs in the requested NSSAI or the network slice-specific authentication and authorization procedure is ongoing for one or more S-NSSAIs, these S-NSSAI(s) will be included in the pending NSSAI. When the network slice-specific authentication and authorization procedure is completed for an S-NSSAI that has been in the pending NSSAI, the S-NSSAI will be moved to the allowed NSSAI or rejected NSSAI depending on the outcome of the procedure. The AMF sends the updated allowed NSSAI to the UE over the same access of the requested S-NSSAI. The AMF sends the updated rejected NSSAI over either 3GPP access or non-3GPP access. The pending NSSAI is managed regardless of access type i.e. the pending NSSAI is applicable to both 3GPP access and non-3GPP access for the current PLMN even if sent over only one of the accesses. If the registration area contains TAIs belonging to different PLMNs, which are equivalent PLMNs, the pending NSSAI is applicable to these PLMNs in this registration area.

The rejected NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN is applicable for the whole registered PLMN or SNPN. The AMF shall only send a rejected NSSAI for the current PLMN when the registration area consists of TAIs that only belong to the registered PLMN. If the UE receives a rejected NSSAI for the current PLMN, and the registration area also contains TAIs belonging to different PLMNs, the UE shall treat the received rejected NSSAI for the current PLMN as applicable to the whole registered PLMN.

The rejected NSSAI for the failed or revoked NSSAA includes one or more S-NSSAIs that have failed the network slice-specific authentication and authorization or for which the authorization have been revoked, and are applicable for the whole registered PLMN or SNPN.

The rejected NSSAI for the maximum number of UEs reached is applicable for the whole registered PLMN or SNPN, and the access type over which the rejected NSSAI was sent. The AMF shall send a rejected NSSAI including S-NSSAI(s) with the rejection cause "S-NSSAI not available due to maximum number of UEs reached", when one or more S-NSSAIs are indicated that the maximum number of UEs has been reached. If the timer T3526 associated with the S-NSSAI(s) was started upon reception of the rejected NSSAI for the maximum number of UEs reached, the UE may remove the S-NSSAI(s) from the rejected NSSAI including S-NSSAI(s) with the rejection cause "S-NSSAI not available due to maximum number of UEs reached", if the timer T3526 associated with the S-NSSAI(s) expires. If one or more S-NSSAIs are removed from the rejected NSSAI for the maximum number of UEs reached, the timer T3526 associated with the removed S-NSSAI(s) shall be stopped, if running. The UE shall not stop the timer T3526 if the UE selects an E-UTRA cell connected to EPC.

If the UE receives a rejected NSSAI for the maximum number of UEs reached, the registration area contains TAIs belonging to different PLMNs, which are equivalent PLMNs, the UE shall treat the received rejected NSSAI for the maximum number of UEs reached as applicable to these equivalent PLMNs when the UE is in this registration area.

NOTE2: Based on local policies, the UE can remove an S-NSSAI from the rejected NSSAI for the failed or revoked NSSAA when the UE wants to register to the slice identified by this S-NSSAI.

NOTE3: Based on network local policy, network slice-specific authentication and authorization procedure can be initiated by the AMF for an S-NSSAI in rejected NSSAI for the failed or revoked NSSAA when the S-NSSAI is requested by the UE based on its local policy.

NOTE4: At least one S-NSSAI in the default configured NSSAI or at least one default S-NSSAI is recommended as not subject to network slice-specific authentication and authorization, in order to ensure that at least one PDU session can be established to access service, even when Network Slice-specific Authentication and Authorization fails.

NOTE5: At least one S-NSSAI in the default configured NSSAI or in the subscribed S-NSSAIs marked as default S-NSSAI is recommended as not subject to network slice admission control, in order to ensure that at least one PDU session can be established to access service.

NOTE6: The rejected NSSAI can be provided by the network via either Rejected NSSAI IE or the Extended rejected NSSAI IE.

4.6.2 Mobility management aspects

4.6.2.1 General

Upon registration to a PLMN or SNPN (except for the registration procedure for periodic registration update, the initial registration for onboarding services in SNPN, and the registration procedure for mobility registration update when registered for onboarding services in SNPN), the UE shall send to the AMF the requested NSSAI which includes one or more S-NSSAIs of the allowed NSSAI for the PLMN or SNPN or the configured NSSAI for the PLMN or SNPN and corresponds to the network slice(s) to which the UE intends to register with, if:

a) the UE has a configured NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN;

b) the UE has an allowed NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN; or

c) the UE has neither allowed NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN nor configured NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN and has a default configured NSSAI. In this case the UE indicates to the AMF that the requested NSSAI is created from the default configured NSSAI.

Other than S-NSSAIs contained in the NSSAIs described above, the requested NSSAI can be formed based on the S-NSSAI(s) available in the UE (see subclause5.5.1.3.2 for further details). In roaming scenarios, the UE shall also provide the mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the requested NSSAI, if available. The AMF verifies if the requested NSSAI is permitted based on the subscribed S-NSSAIs in the UE subscription and optionally the mapped S-NSSAI(s) provided by the UE, and if so then the AMF shall provide the UE with the allowed NSSAI for the PLMN or SNPN, and shall also provide the UE with the mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the allowed NSSAI for the PLMN or SNPN if available. The AMF shall ensure that there are not two or more S-NSSAIs of the allowed NSSAI which are mapped to the same S-NSSAI of the HPLMN or SNPN. If

a) all the S-NSSAIs included in the requested NSSAI are rejected, or the requested NSSAI was not included by the UE;

b) there is no default S-NSSAI(s) or all subscribed S-NSSAIs marked as default are not allowed; and

c) the UE is neither registering nor registered for onboarding services in SNPN and the UE is neither registering nor registered for emergency services;

then the AMF may reject the registration request (see subclauses5.5.1.2.5 and 5.5.1.3.5 for further details).

The set of network slice(s) for a UE can be changed at any time while the UE is registered to a PLMN or SNPN, and the change may be initiated by the network or the UE. In this case, the allowed NSSAI and associated registration area may be changed during the registration procedure or the generic UE configuration update procedure. The configured NSSAI and the rejected NSSAI may be changed during the registration procedure or the generic UE configuration update procedure. The default configured NSSAI may be changed by sending a UE parameters update transparent container to the UE during the NAS transport procedure. The pending NSSAI may be changed during the registration procedure. In addition, using the generic UE configuration update procedure, the network may trigger the registration procedure in order to update the allowed NSSAI.

The UE in NB-N1 mode does not include the requested NSSAI during the registration procedure if the 5GS registration type IE indicates "mobility registration updating", procedure is not initiated to change the slice(s) that the UE is currently registered to, and the UE is still in the current registration area. The UE does not include the requested NSSAI during the registration procedure if the 5GS registration type IE indicates "SNPN onboarding registration" or the UE is registered for onboarding services in SNPN.

The AMF does not include the allowed NSSAI during a registration procedure with the 5GS registration type IE indicating "mobility registration updating" except if the allowed NSSAI has changed for the UE. The UE considers the last received allowed NSSAI as valid until the UE receives a new allowed NSSAI. The AMF does not include the allowed NSSAI during a registration procedure with the 5GS registration type IE indicating "SNPN onboarding registration" or during a registration procedure when the UE is registered for onboarding services in SNPN.

4.6.2.2 NSSAI storage

If available, the configured NSSAI(s) shall be stored in a non-volatile memory in the ME as specified in annexC. For a configured NSSAI, if there is associated NSSRG information, the NSSRG information shall also be stored in a non-volatile memory in the ME as specified in annexC. For a configured NSSAI, if there is associated NSAG information, the NSAG information shall be stored in the ME. The support for NSSRG information and NSAG information by a UE or an AMF is optional.

The allowed NSSAI(s) should be stored in a non-volatile memory in the ME as specified in annexC.

Each of the configured NSSAI stored in the UE is a set composed of at most 16 S-NSSAIs. Each of the allowed NSSAI stored in the UE is a set composed of at most 8 S-NSSAIs and is associated with a PLMN identity or SNPN identity, an access type and, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription. Each of the configured NSSAI except the default configured NSSAI, and the rejected NSSAI is associated with a PLMN identity or SNPN identity and, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription. Each of the pending NSSAI stored in the UE is a set composed of at most 16 S-NSSAIs and is associated with a PLMN identity or SNPN identity and, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription. The S-NSSAI(s) in the rejected NSSAI for the current registration area are further associated with one or more tracking areas where the rejected S-NSSAI(s) is not available. The S-NSSAI(s) in the rejected NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN shall be considered rejected for the current PLMN or SNPN regardless of the access type. The S-NSSAI(s) in the rejected NSSAI for the failed or revoked NSSAA shall be considered rejected for the current PLMN or SNPN regardless of the access type. The S-NSSAI(s) in the rejected NSSAI for the maximum number of UEs reached are further associated with the access type over which the rejected NSSAI was received. There shall be no duplicated PLMN identities or SNPN identities associated with each of the list of configured NSSAI(s), pending NSSAI(s), rejected NSSAI(s) for the current PLMN or SNPN, rejected NSSAI(s) for the current registration area, rejected NSSAI(s) for the failed or revoked NSSAA, and rejected NSSAI for the maximum number of UEs reached.

The UE stores NSSAIs as follows:

a) The configured NSSAI shall be stored until a new configured NSSAI is received for a given PLMN or SNPN. The network may provide to the UE the mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the new configured NSSAI which shall also be stored in the UE. When the UE is provisioned with a new configured NSSAI for a PLMN or SNPN, the UE shall:

1) replace any stored configured NSSAI for this PLMN or SNPN with the new configured NSSAI for this PLMN or SNPN;

2) delete any stored mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the configured NSSAI and, if available, store the mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the new configured NSSAI;

3) delete any stored allowed NSSAI for this PLMN or SNPN and, if available, the stored mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the allowed NSSAI, if the UE received the new configured NSSAI for this PLMN or SNPN and the Configuration update indication IE with the Registration requested bit set to "registration requested", in the same CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message but without any new allowed NSSAI for this PLMN or SNPN included;

4) delete any stored rejected NSSAI, and stop the timer T3526 associated with the deleted rejected S-NSSAI for the maximum number of UEs reached if running;

4A) remove from the stored mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the rejected NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN and the stored mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the rejected NSSAI for the current registration area and the stored rejected NSSAI for the maximum number of UEs reached, the S-NSSAI(s), if any, included in the mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the new configured NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN (if the UE is roaming), and stop the timer T3526 associated with the deleted rejected S-NSSAI for the maximum number of UEs reached if running; and

5) delete any S-NSSAI(s) stored in the pending NSSAI that are not included in the new configured NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN or any mapped S-NSSAI(s), if any, stored in the pending NSSAI that are not included in the mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the configured NSSAI (if the UE is roaming);

 If the UE receives an S-NSSAI associated with a PLMN ID from the network during the PDN connection establishment procedure in EPS as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] or via ePDG as specified in 3GPPTS24.302[16], the UE may store the received S-NSSAI in the configured NSSAI for the PLMN identified by the PLMN ID associated with the S-NSSAI, if not already included in the configured NSSAI;

 The UE may continue storing a received configured NSSAI for a PLMN and associated mapped S-NSSAI(s), if available, when the UE registers in another PLMN.

NOTE1: The maximum number of configured NSSAIs and associated mapped S-NSSAIs for PLMNs other than the HPLMN that need to be stored in the UE, and how to handle the stored entries, are up to UE implementation.

ab) The NSAG information shall be stored until:

1) a new NSAG information is received for the registered PLMN over 3GPP access; or

2) a new configured NSSAI without any associated NSAG information is received for the registered PLMN over 3GPP access.

 When a new NSAG information for the registered PLMN over 3GPP access is received, the UE shall replace any stored NSAG information for the registered PLMN and its equivalent PLMN(s) with the new NSAG information for the registered PLMN.

 When a new configured NSSAI without any associated NSAG information is received for the registered PLMN over 3GPP access, the UE shall delete any stored NSAG information for the registered PLMN and its equivalent PLMN(s).

NOTE2: Whether the UE stores the NSAG information also when the UE is switched off or when the UE is deregistered from the registered PLMN over 3GPP access is implementation specific.

b) The allowed NSSAI shall be stored until:

1) a new allowed NSSAI for the same access type (i.e. 3GPP access or non-3GPP access) is received for a given PLMN or SNPN;

2) the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message with the Registration requested bit of the Configuration update indication IE set to "registration requested" is received and contains no other parameters (see subclauses5.4.4.2 and 5.4.4.3); or

3) the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message is received with the "NSSAA to be performed" indicator of the 5GS registration result IE set to "Network slice-specific authentication and authorization is to be performed", and the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message contains a pending NSSAI and no new allowed NSSAI as described in subclause5.5.1.2.4 and subclause5.5.1.3.4.

 The network may provide to the UE the mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the new allowed NSSAI (see subclauses5.5.1.2 and 5.5.1.3) which shall also be stored in the UE. When a new allowed NSSAI for a PLMN or SNPN is received, the UE shall:

1) replace any stored allowed NSSAI for this PLMN or SNPN and its equivalent PLMN(s) for the same access type with the new allowed NSSAI for this PLMN or SNPN;

2) delete any stored mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the allowed NSSAI for this PLMN or SNPN and its equivalent PLMN(s) for the same access type and, if available, store the mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the new allowed NSSAI;

3) remove from the stored rejected NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN, the rejected NSSAI for the current registration area and rejected NSSAI for the maximum number of UEs reached, the S-NSSAI(s), if any, included in the new allowed NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN, unless the S-NSSAI in the rejected NSSAI is associated with one or more S-NSSAI(s) in the stored mapped rejected NSSAI and these mapped S-NSSAI(s) are not included in the mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the new allowed NSSAI, and stop the timer T3526 associated with the deleted rejected S-NSSAI for the maximum number of UEs reached if running;

4) remove from the stored rejected NSSAI for the failed or revoked NSSAA, the S-NSSAI(s), if any, included in the new allowed NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN (if the UE is not roaming) or the mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the new allowed NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN (if the UE is roaming);

5) remove from the stored mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the rejected NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN, the stored mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the rejected NSSAI for the current registration area and rejected NSSAI for the maximum number of UEs reached, the S-NSSAI(s), if any, included in the mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the new allowed NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN (if the UE is roaming), and stop the timer T3526 associated with the deleted rejected S-NSSAI for the maximum number of UEs reached if running; and

6) remove from the stored pending NSSAI for this PLMN or SNPN and its equivalent PLMN(s), one or more S-NSSAIs, if any, included in the new allowed NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN and its equivalent PLMN(s) (if the UE is not roaming) or the mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the new allowed NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN and its equivalent PLMN(s) (if the UE is roaming).

 If the UE receives the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message with the Registration requested bit of the Configuration update indication IE set to "registration requested" and contains no other parameters (see subclauses5.4.4.2 and 5.4.4.3), the UE shall delete any stored allowed NSSAI for this PLMN or SNPN, and delete any stored mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the allowed NSSAI, if available;

NOTE3: Whether the UE stores the allowed NSSAI and the mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the allowed NSSAI also when the UE is switched off is implementation specific.

c) When the UE receives the S-NSSAI(s) included in the rejected NSSAI in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message, the REGISTRATION REJECT message, the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message or in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message, the UE shall:

1) store the S-NSSAI(s) into the rejected NSSAI and the mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the rejected NSSAI based on the associated rejection cause(s);

2) if the UE receives the S-NSSAI(s) included in the Rejected NSSAI IE, or if the UE receives the S-NSSAI(s) included in the Extended rejected NSSAI IE in non-roaming case, remove from the stored allowed NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN and its equivalent PLMN(s), the S-NSSAI(s), if any, included in the:

i) rejected NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN, for each and every access type;

ii) rejected NSSAI for the current registration area, associated with the same access type; or

iii) rejected NSSAI for the maximum number of UEs reached, associated with the same access type;

3) if the UE receives the S-NSSAI(s) included in the Extended rejected NSSAI IE in roaming case, remove from the stored allowed NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN and its equivalent PLMN(s), the S-NSSAI(s), if any, included in the:

i) rejected NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN, for each and every access type;

ii) rejected NSSAI for the current registration area, associated with the same access type; or

iii) rejected NSSAI for the maximum number of UEs reached, associated with the same access type;

 if the mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the S-NSSAI in the stored allowed NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN are stored in the UE, and the all of the mapped S-NSSAI are included in the Extended rejected NSSAI IE;

4) remove from the stored allowed NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN and its equivalent PLMN(s) (if the UE is not roaming) or the stored mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the allowed NSSAI (if available and if the UE is roaming), the S-NSSAI(s), if any, included in the:

i) rejected NSSAI for the failed or revoked NSSAA, for each and every access type;

ii) mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the rejected NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN, for each and every access type;

iii) mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the rejected NSSAI for the current registration area, associated with the same access type; or

iv) mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the rejected NSSAI for the maximum number of UEs reached, associated with the same access type;

5) if the UE receives the S-NSSAI(s) included in the Rejected NSSAI IE, or if the UE receives the S-NSSAI(s) included in the Extended rejected NSSAI IE in non-roaming case, remove from the stored pending NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN and its equivalent PLMN(s), the S-NSSAI(s), if any, included in the:

i) rejected NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN, for each and every access type;

ii) rejected NSSAI for the current registration area, associated with the same access type; or

iii) rejected NSSAI for the maximum number of UEs reached, associated with the same access type;

6) if the UE receives the S-NSSAI(s) included in the Extended rejected NSSAI IE in roaming case, remove from the stored pending NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN and its equivalent PLMN(s), the S-NSSAI(s), if any, included in the:

i) rejected NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN, for each and every access type;

ii) rejected NSSAI for the current registration area, associated with the same access type; or

iii) rejected NSSAI for the maximum number of UEs reached, associated with the same access type,

 if the mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the S-NSSAI in the stored pending NSSAI are stored in the UE, and all of the mapped S-NSSAI(s) are included in the Extended rejected NSSAI IE; and

7) remove from the stored pending NSSAI for the current PLMN and its equivalent PLMN(s) or SNPN (if the UE is not roaming) or the stored mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the pending NSSAI (if available and if the UE is roaming), the S-NSSAI(s) included in the:

i) rejected NSSAI for the failed or revoked NSSAA, for each and every access type;

ii) mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the rejected NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN, for each and every access type;

iii) mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the rejected NSSAI for the current registration area, associated with the same access type; or

iv) mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the rejected NSSAI for the maximum number of UEs reached, associated with the same access type;

8) If the UE receives the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message with the Registration requested bit of the Configuration update indication IE set to "registration requested" and contains no other parameters (see subclauses5.4.4.2 and 5.4.4.3), the UE shall delete any stored rejected NSSAI.

 When the UE:

1) enters state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED following an unsuccessful registration for 5GMM causes other than #62 "No network slices available" for the current PLMN or SNPN;

2) successfully registers with a new PLMN or SNPN;

3) enters state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED following an unsuccessful registration with a new PLMN; or

4) performs inter-system change from N1 mode to S1 mode and the UE successfully completes tracking area update procedure;

 and the UE is not registered with the current PLMN or SNPN over another access, the rejected NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN and the rejected NSSAI for the failed or revoked NSSAA shall be deleted.

 When the UE receive ACTIVATE DEFAULT EPS BEARER CONTEXT REQUEST message provided with S-NSSAI and the PLMN ID in the protocol configuration options IE or extended protocol configuration options IE (see subclause6.2.2 of 3GPPTS24.301[15]), the UE shall remove the S-NSSAI from the rejected NSSAI for the current PLMN. When the UE receive ACTIVATE DEFAULT EPS BEARER CONTEXT REQUEST message provided with S-NSSAI and the PLMN ID in the protocol configuration options IE or extended protocol configuration options IE (see subclause6.2.2 of 3GPPTS24.301[15]), the UE may remove the S-NSSAI from the rejected NSSAI for the maximum number of UEs reached for each and every access type, if any, and stop the timer T3526 associated with the S-NSSAI if running.

 When the UE:

1) deregisters over an access type;

2) successfully registers in a new registration area over an access type;

3) enters state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED or 5GMM-REGISTERED following an unsuccessful registration in a new registration area over an access type; or

4) performs inter-system change from N1 mode to S1 mode and the UE successfully completes tracking area update procedure;

 the rejected NSSAI for the current registration area corresponding to the access type shall be deleted;

d) When the UE receives the pending NSSAI in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message, the UE shall replace any stored pending NSSAI for this PLMN or SNPN with the new pending NSSAI received in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message for this PLMN or SNPN. If the UE does not receive the pending NSSAI in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message and the "NSSAA to be performed" indicator is not set to "Network slice-specific authentication and authorization is to be performed" in the 5GS registration result IE of the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message, the UE shall delete the stored pending NSSAI, if any, for this PLMN or SNPN and its equivalent PLMN(s).

 If the registration area contains TAIs belonging to different PLMNs, which are equivalent PLMNs, then for each of the equivalent PLMNs, the UE shall replace any stored pending NSSAI with the pending NSSAI received in the registered PLMN.

 When the UE:

1) deregisters with the current PLMN or SNPN using explicit signalling or enters state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED for the current PLMN or SNPN;

2) successfully registers with a new PLMN or SNPN not in the list of equivalent PLMNs;

3) enters state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED following an unsuccessful registration with a new PLMN or SNPN; or

4) successfully initiates an attach or tracking area update procedure in S1 mode and the UE is operating in single-registration mode;

 and the UE is not registered with the current PLMN or SNPN over another access, the pending NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN and its equivalent PLMN(s) shall be deleted;

e) When the UE receives the Network slicing indication IE with the Network slicing subscription change indication set to "Network slicing subscription changed" in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message or in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message, the UE shall delete the network slicing information for each of the PLMNs or SNPNs that the UE has slicing information stored for (excluding the current PLMN or SNPN). The UE shall delete any stored rejected NSSAI and stop the timer T3526 associated with the deleted rejected S-NSSAI for the maximum number of UEs reached if running. The UE shall not delete the default configured NSSAI. Additionally, the UE shall update the network slicing information for the current PLMN or SNPN (if received) as specified above in bullets a), b), c) and d); and

f) When the UE receives the new default configured NSSAI included in the default configured NSSAI update data in the Payload container IE of DL NAS TRANSPORT message, the UE shall replace any stored default configured NSSAI with the new default configured NSSAI. In case of SNPN, the UE shall replace the stored default configured NSSAI associated with the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the PLMN subscription with the new default configured NSSAI.

4.6.2.3 Provision of NSSAI to lower layers in 5GMM-IDLE mode

The UE NAS layer may provide the lower layers with an NSSAI (either requested NSSAI or allowed NSSAI) when the UE in 5GMM-IDLE mode sends an initial NAS message.

The AMF may indicate, via the NSSAI inclusion mode IE of a REGISTRATION ACCEPT message, an NSSAI inclusion mode in which the UE shall operate over the current access within the current PLMN or SNPN, if any (see subclauses5.5.1.2.4 and 5.5.1.3.4), where the NSSAI inclusion mode is chosen among the following NSSAI inclusion modes described in table4.6.2.3.1.

Table4.6.2.3.1: NSSAI inclusion modes and NSSAI which shall be provided to the lower layers

Initial NAS message

NSSAI inclusion modeA

NSSAI inclusion modeB

NSSAI inclusion modeC

NSSAI inclusion modeD

REGISTRATION REQUEST message:
i) including the 5GS registration type IE set to "initial registration"

Requested NSSAI, if any

Requested NSSAI, if any

Requested NSSAI, if any

No NSSAI

REGISTRATION REQUEST message:
i) including the 5GS registration type IE set to "mobility registration updating"; and
ii) initiated by case other thancase g) or n) in subclause5.5.1.3.2

Requested NSSAI, if any

Requested NSSAI, if any

Requested NSSAI, if any

No NSSAI

REGISTRATION REQUEST message:
i) including the 5GS registration type IE set to "mobility registration updating"; and
ii) initiated by case g) or n) in subclause5.5.1.3.2

Allowed NSSAI, if any

Allowed NSSAI, if any

No NSSAI, if any

No NSSAI

REGISTRATION REQUEST message:
i) including the 5GS registration type IE set to "periodic registration updating"

Allowed NSSAI, if any

Allowed NSSAI, if any

No NSSAI

No NSSAI

SERVICE REQUEST message

Allowed NSSAI, if any

See NOTE1

No NSSAI

No NSSAI

NOTE1: All the S-NSSAIs of the PDU sessions that have the user-plane resources requested to be re-established by the service request procedure or the S-NSSAIs of a control plane interaction triggering the service request is related to (see 3GPPTS23.501[8])

NOTE2: For a REGISTRATION REQUEST message which is triggered by emergency services, a DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message and a SERVICE REQUEST message which includes the service type IE set to "emergency services" or "emergency services fallback", no NSSAI is provided to the lower layers. If the UE performs initial registration for onboarding services in SNPN or is registered for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE NAS layer shall not provide the lower layers with an NSSAI.

NOTE3: The mapped configured S-NSSAI(s) from the S-NSSAI(s) of the HPLMN are not included as part of the S-NSSAIs in the requested NSSAI or the allowed NSSAI when it is provided to the lower layers.



The UE shall store the NSSAI inclusion mode:

a) indicated by the AMF, if the AMF included the NSSAI inclusion mode IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message; or

b) decided by the UE, if the AMF did not include the NSSAI inclusion mode IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message;

together with the identity of the current PLMN or SNPN and access type in a non-volatile memory in the ME as specified in annexC.

The UE shall apply the NSSAI inclusion mode received in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message over the current access within the current PLMN and its equivalent PLMN(s) or the current SNPN, if any, in the current registration area.

When a UE performs a registration procedure to a PLMN which is not a PLMN in the current registration area or an SNPN, if the UE has no NSSAI inclusion mode for the PLMN or the SNPN stored in a non-volatile memory in the ME, the UE shall provide the lower layers with:

a) no NSSAI if the UE is performing the registration procedure over 3GPP access; or

b) requested NSSAI if the UE is performing the registration procedure over non-3GPP access.

When a UE performs a registration procedure after an inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode, if the UE has no NSSAI inclusion mode for the PLMN stored in a non-volatile memory in the ME and the registration procedure is performed over 3GPP access, the UE shall not provide the lower layers with any NSSAI over the 3GPP access.

4.6.2.4 Network slice-specific authentication and authorization

The UE and network may support network slice-specific authentication and authorization.

A serving PLMN or SNPN shall perform network slice-specific authentication and authorization for the S-NSSAI(s) of the HPLMN or SNPN which are subject to it based on subscription information. The UE shall indicate whether it supports network slice-specific authentication and authorization in the 5GMM Capability IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message as specified in subclauses5.5.1.2.2and5.5.1.3.2.

The upper layer stores an association between each S-NSSAI and its corresponding credentials for the network slice-specific authentication and authorization.

NOTE1: The credentials for network slice-specific authentication and authorization and how to provision them in the upper layer are out of the scope of 3GPP.

The network slice-specific authentication and authorization procedure shall not be performed unless the primary authentication and key agreement procedure as specified in the subclause5.4.1 has successfully been completed.

The AMF informs the UE about S-NSSAI(s) for which network slice-specific authentication and authorization (except for re-NSSAA) will be performed or is ongoing in the pending NSSAI. The AMF informs the UE about S-NSSAI(s) for which NSSAA procedure is completed as success in the allowed NSSAI. The AMF informs the UE about S-NSSAI(s) for which NSSAA procedure is completed as failure in the rejected NSSAI for the failed or revoked NSSAA. The AMF stores and handles allowed NSSAI, pending NSSAI, rejected NSSAI, and 5GS registration result in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message according to subclauses5.5.1.2.4 and 5.5.1.3.4.

NOTE2: The AMF maintains the NSSAA procedure status for each S-NSSAI, as specified in 3GPPTS29.518[20B] and the NSSAA procedure status for each S-NSSAI is not impacted by NSAC as specified in subclauses4.6.2.5 and 4.6.3.1.

NOTE3: Upon completion of NSSAA procedures, it can happen that the total number of S-NSSAIs which need to be included in the allowed NSSAI exceeds eight. In this case, it is up to the AMF implementation on how to pick up the S-NSSAIs included in the allowed NSSAI.

NOTE4: It can happen that one or more S-NSSAIs included in the received allowed NSSAI, are not the S-NSSAIs that the UE intends to register to. In this case, it is up to the UE implementation on how to use these S-NSSAIs.

To perform network slice-specific authentication and authorization for an S-NSSAI, the AMF invokes an EAP-based network slice-specific authentication and authorization procedure for the S-NSSAI, see subclause5.4.7 and 3GPPTS23.502[9] using the EAP framework as described in 3GPPTS33.501[24].

The AMF updates the allowed NSSAI and the rejected NSSAI using the generic UE configuration update procedure as specified in the subclause5.4.4 after the network slice-specific authentication and authorization procedure is completed.

The AMF shall send the pending NSSAI containing all S-NSSAIs for which the network slice-specific authentication and authorization procedure (except for re-NSSAA) will be performed or is ongoing in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. The AMF shall also include in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message the allowed NSSAI containing one or more S-NSSAIs from the requested NSSAI which are allowed by the AMF and for which network slice-specific authentication and authorization is not required, if any.The network slice-specific authentication and authorization procedure or the network slice-specific authorization revocation procedure can be invoked by the network for a UE supporting NSSAA at any time. After the network performs the network slice-specific re-authentication and re-authorization procedure or network slice-specific authorization revocation procedure:

a) if network slice-specific authentication and authorization fails or network slice-specific authorization is revoked for some but not all S-NSSAIs in the allowed NSSAI, the AMF updates the allowed NSSAI and the rejected NSSAI accordingly using the generic UE configuration update procedure as specified in the subclause5.4.4 and inform the SMF to release all PDU sessions associated with the S-NSSAI for which network slice-specific re-authentication and re-authorization fails or network slice-specific authorization is revoked;

b) if network slice-specific authentication and authorization fails or network slice-specific authorization is revoked for all S-NSSAIs in the allowed NSSAI but there are one or more default S-NSSAIs which are not subject to network slice-specific authentication and authorization or for which the network slice-specific authentication and authorization has been successfully performed, the AMF updates the allowed NSSAI containing these default S-NSSAIs and the rejected NSSAI accordingly using the generic UE configuration update procedure as specified in the subclause5.4.4. The AMF shall also inform the SMF to release all PDU sessions associated with the S-NSSAI for which network slice-specific re-authentication and re-authorization fails or network slice-specific authorization is revoked; or

c) if network slice-specific authentication and authorization fails or network slice-specific authorization is revoked for all S-NSSAIs in the allowed NSSAI and all default S-NSSAIs are subject to network slice-specific authentication and authorization, then AMF performs the network-initiated de-registration procedure and includes the rejected NSSAI in the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message as specified in the subclause5.5.2.3 except when the UE has an emergency PDU session established or the UE is establishing an emergency PDU session. In this case the AMF shall send the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message containing rejected NSSAI and inform the SMF to release all PDU sessions associated with the S-NSSAI for which network slice-specific re-authentication and re-authorization fails or network slice-specific authorization is revoked. After the emergency PDU session is released, the AMF performs the network-initiated de-registration procedure as specified in the subclause5.5.2.3.

The UE does not include in the requested NSSAI any of the S-NSSAIs from the pending NSSAI that the UE stores, regardless of the access type. When the UE storing a pending NSSAI intends to register to one or more additional S-NSSAIs not included in the pending NSSAI, the UE initiates the registration procedure with a requested NSSAI containing these S-NSSAIs as described in subclause5.5.1.3.2. In this case, the requested NSSAI shall also include one or more S-NSSAIs from the allowed NSSAI, if the UE still wants to use the S-NSSAI(s) from the allowed NSSAI.

During the registration procedure, when the AMF receives a requested NSSAI from a UE over an access type, for which there is a pending NSSAI including one or more S-NSSAIs that were previously requested over the same access type, the AMF considers S-NSSAIs included in the requested NSSAI and S-NSSAIs in the pending NSSAI that were previously requested over the same access type as requested S-NSSAIs by the UE. The AMF handles the requested S-NSSAIs as described in subclause5.5.1.3.4.

When performing the network slice-specific re-authentication and re-authorization procedure if the S-NSSAI is included in the allowed NSSAI for both 3GPP and non-3GPP accesses, and the UE is registered to both 3GPP and non-3GPP accesses in the same PLMN, then the AMF selects an access type to perform network slice-specific authentication and authorization based upon operator policy.

If network slice-specific authorization is revoked for an S-NSSAI that is in the current allowed NSSAI for an access type, the AMF shall:

a) provide a new allowed NSSAI, excluding the S-NSSAI for which the network slice-specific authorization is revoked; and

b) provide a new rejected NSSAI for the failed or revoked NSSAA, including the S-NSSAI for which the network slice-specific authorization is revoked, with the rejection cause "S-NSSAI not available due to the failed or revoked network slice-specific authentication and authorization",

to the UE using the generic UE configuration update procedure as specified in the subclause5.4.4 and inform the SMF to release all PDU sessions associated with the S-NSSAI for which the network slice-specific authorization is revoked for this access type.

If the UE requests the establishment of a new PDU session or the modification of a PDU session for an S-NSSAI for which the AMF is performing network slice-specific re-authentication and re-authorization procedure, the AMF may determine to not forward the 5GSM message to the SMF as described in subclause5.4.5.2.4.

NOTE5: If the AMF receives the HTTP code set to "4xx" or "5xx" as specified in 3GPPTS29.500[20AA] or the AMF detects that the NSSAAF failure as specified in 3GPPTS29.526[21A] during the NSSAA procedure for an S-NSSAI, then the AMF considers the NSSAA procedure has failed for this S-NSSAI.

4.6.2.5 Mobility management based network slice admission control

A serving PLMN or SNPN can perform network slice admission control for the S-NSSAI(s) subject to NSAC to monitor and control the number of registered UEs per network slice. The timing of the network slice admission control is managed by the EAC mode per network slice, which can be either activated or deactivated for the network performing network slice admission control. The EAC mode is activated when the number of UEs associated with the S-NSSAI reaches a certain threshold (see 3GPPTS23.502[9])

If the EAC mode is activated for an S-NSSAI, the AMF performs network slice admission control before the S-NSSAI subject to NSAC is included in the allowed NSSAI sent to the UE. During a registration procedure (including initial registration or mobility registration updating from another AMF), if the AMF determines that the maximum number of UEs has been reached for:

a) one or more S-NSSAIs but not all S-NSSAIs in the requested NSSAI, then the AMF includes the allowed NSSAI and the rejected NSSAI accordingly in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message as specified in the subclauses5.5.1.2.4 and 5.5.1.3.4;

b) all S-NSSAIs in the requested NSSAI but there are one or more default S-NSSAIs which can be allowed to the UE, then the AMF includes the allowed NSSAI containing these default S-NSSAIs and the rejected NSSAI accordingly in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message as specified in the subclauses5.5.1.2.4 and 5.5.1.3.4; or

c) all S-NSSAIs in the requested NSSAI and there are no default S-NSSAIs which can be allowed to the UE, then the AMF includes the rejected NSSAI accordingly in the REGISTRATION REJECT message as specified in the subclauses5.5.1.2.5 and 5.5.1.3.5.

If the EAC mode is deactivated for an S-NSSAI, the AMF performs network slice admission control after the S-NSSAI subject to NSAC is included in the allowed NSSAI sent to the UE. While the AMF is waiting for response from the NSCAF for the S-NSSAI, the AMF processes the NAS signalling message related to the S-NSSAI as usual i.e. like S-NSSAI in the allowed NSSAI. After the network performs the network slice admission control, if the AMF determines that the maximum number of UEs has been reached for:

a) one or more S-NSSAIs but not all S-NSSAIs in the allowed NSSAI, then the AMF updates the allowed NSSAI and the rejected NSSAI accordingly using the generic UE configuration update procedure as specified in the subclause5.4.4;

b) for all S-NSSAIs in the allowed NSSAI but there are one or more default S-NSSAIs which can be allowed to the UE, then the AMF updates the allowed NSSAI containing these default S-NSSAIs and the rejected NSSAI accordingly using the generic UE configuration update procedure as specified in the subclause5.4.4; or

c) for all S-NSSAIs in the allowed NSSAI and there are no default S-NSSAIs which can be allowed to the UE, then the AMF performs the network-initiated de-registration procedure and includes the rejected NSSAI in the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message as specified in the subclause5.5.2.3 except when the UE has an emergency PDU session established or the UE is establishing an emergency PDU session.

 When the UE has an emergency PDU session established or the UE is establishing an emergency PDU session, the AMF updates the rejected NSSAI using the generic UE configuration update procedure as specified in the subclause5.4.4 and informs the SMF to release all PDU sessions associated with the S-NSSAI. During the generic UE configuration update procedure, the AMF includes the 5GS registration result IE in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message and sets the Emergency registered bit of the 5GS registration result IE to "Registered for emergency services". After the emergency PDU session is released, the AMF performs the network-initiated de-registration procedure as specified in the subclause5.5.2.3.

Based on operator policy, the mobility management based network slice admission control is not applicable for the S-NSSAI used for emergency services, or the mobility management based network slice admission control result is ignored for the S-NSSAI used for emergency services.

Based on operator policy, the mobility management based network slice admission control is not applicable for the UEs configured for priority services, or the mobility management based network slice admission control result is ignored for the UEs configured for priority services.

NOTE: A UE configured for priority services can be identified based on the RRC establishment cause received from the NG-RAN or based on the MPS priority information in the user's subscription context obtained from the UDM.

The mobility management based network slice admission control is not applicable to a UE that is registering or registered for onboarding services in SNPN.

4.6.2.6 Provision of NSAG information to lower layers

NSAG information includes a list of NSAG IDs each of which is associated with:

a) a list of S-NSSAIs, which shall be the ones included in the configured NSSAI;

b) an NSAG area containing a list of TAIs which identify an area where the mapping between the S-NSSAI(s) in bullet a) and the NSAG ID is valid; and

c) a priority value that is associated with each NSAG ID in the NSAG information.

If NSAG information is available, the UE NAS layer shall provide the lower layers with the most recent NSAG information.

NOTE: Along with the NSAG information, the UE provides to the lower layers with allowed NSSAI and requested NSSAI for the purpose of NSAG-aware cell reselection.

4.6.3 Session management aspects

4.6.3.0 General

In order to enable PDU transmission in a network slice, the UE may request establishment of a PDU session in a network slice towards a data network (DN) which is associated with an S-NSSAI and a data network name (DNN) if there is no established PDU session adequate for the PDU transmission. The S-NSSAI included is part of allowed NSSAI of the serving PLMN or SNPN, which is an S-NSSAI value valid in the serving PLMN or SNPN, and in roaming scenarios the mapped S-NSSAI is also included for the PDU session if available. See subclause6.4.1 for further details. The UE determines whether to establish a new PDU session or use one of the established PDU session(s) based on the URSP rules which include S-NSSAIs, if any (see subclause6.2.9), or based on UE local configuration, as described in subclause4.2.2 of 3GPPTS24.526[19].

4.6.3.1 Session management based network slice admission control

A serving PLMN or the HPLMN, or SNPN can perform network slice admission control for the S-NSSAI(s) subject to NSAC to monitor and control the total number of established PDU sessions per network slice. The SMF performs network slice admission control on the S-NSSAI during the PDU session establishment procedure. If the maximum number of PDU sessions on a network slice associated with an S-NSSAI has been already reached, the SMF rejects the PDU session establishment request using S-NSSAI based congestion control as specifed in subclause6.2.8 and 6.4.1.4.2.

The SMF performs network slice admission control on the S-NSSAI for a PDU session that is associated with the non-3GPP access, when the UE requests to transfer a session from the non-3GPP access to the 3GPP access with the Allowed PDU session status IE as described in subclause5.6.1.4. If the maximum number of PDU sessions on a network slice associated with an S-NSSAI has been already reached, the SMF rejects the request to establish the user-plane resources (see 3GPPTS29.502[20A]).

Based on operator policy, the session management based network slice admission control is not applicable for the PDU session for emergency services, or the session management based network slice admission control result is ignored for the PDU session for emergency services.

Based on operator policy, the session management based network slice admission control is not applicable for the PDU session for priority services, or the session management based network slice admission control result is ignored for the PDU session for priority services.

NOTE: How the SMF determines that the PDU session is used for priority services is outside the scope of this release of the present document.

The session management based network slice admission control is not applicable to PDU session established for onboarding services in SNPN.

NOTE1: For the MA PDU session during the PDU session establishment procedure, the SMF performs network slice admission control only when it is newly established over the associated access type.

NOTE2: For a set of redundant PDU sessions, the SMF performs network slice admission control for each PDU session independently.

4.6.3.2 Support of network slice admission control and interworking with EPC

If EPS counting is required for a network slice, the network performs network slice admission control for the S-NSSAI(s) subject to NSAC to monitor and control the number of UEs per network slice and number of PDU sessions per network slice during the PDN connection establishment procedure. If the maximum number of UEs on a network slice associated with an S-NSSAI or the maximum number of PDU sessions on a network slice associated with an S-NSSAI have already been reached, the network rejects the PDN connectivity request using ESM cause #26 "insufficient resources" as specifed in 3GPPTS24.301[15].

NOTE: If there are more than one S-NSSAI associated with the APN used in the PDN connectivity request and some of but not all associated S-NSSAIs are not available due to either maximum number of UEs reached or maximum number of PDU sessions reached, the network can use the associated S-NSSAI for which maximum number of UEs and maximum number of PDU sessions have not reached to avoid PDN connectivity request rejection.

4.6.3.3 Session management based network slice data rate limitation control

A serving PLMN or the HPLMN can perform network slice data rate limitation control for the S-NSSAI(s) subject to network slice data rate limitation control to monitor and control the total data rate of established PDU sessions per network slice as specified in 3GPPTS23.503[10]. If the maximum data rate of PDU sessions on a network slice associated with an S-NSSAI has been exceeded during the PDU session establishment procedure, the SMF may reject the PDU session establishment request using S-NSSAI based congestion control as specified in clause6.2.8 and 6.4.1.4.2.

A serving PLMN or the HPLMN can perform management of Slice-Maximum Bit Rate per UE (UE-Slice-MBR) as specified in 3GPPTS23.503[10]. When the UE-Slice-MBR for the UE and S-NSSAI to which the PDU session is allocated is exceeded during the PDU session establishment procedure, the SMF may reject the PDU session establishment request using S-NSSAI based congestion control as specified in clause6.2.8 and 6.4.1.4.2.

NOTE1: Based on operator policy, the network slice data rate limitation control can be not applicable for the S-NSSAI(s) used for emergency services or priority services.

NOTE2: The network slice data rate limitation control and UE-Slice-MBR management are performed by the PCF.

4.7 NAS over non-3GPP access

4.7.1 General

From the UE's NAS perspective, in general the procedures and messages defined for 5GMM and 5GSM are used over non-3GPP access as over 3GPP access. However, a number of aspects are different as described in the following subclauses.

4.7.2 5GS mobility management aspects

4.7.2.1 General

The mobility management procedures defined over 3GPP access are re-used over non-3GPP access with the following exceptions:

a) the registration status, and the 5GMM parameters of the UE's 3GPP access and non-3GPP access 5GMM state machine instances are independent in each of these accesses and can be different;

b) single-registration mode and dual-registration mode do not apply for 5GMM over non-3GPP access;

c) the RPLMN over non-3GPP access can be different from the RPLMN over 3GPP access. The MCC of the RPLMN over 3GPP access and the MCC of the RPLMN over the non-3GPP access can also be different;

d) the registration for 3GPP access and for non-3GPP access are performed separately. Like for 3GPP access, an access stratum connection exists before the UE can perform the registration procedure for non-3GPP access. As at registration over non-3GPP access the UE is allocated a registration area, which is associated with a single TAI, list management of registration areas is not required, and registration updating due to registration area change with the registered PLMN is not performed. Furthermore, the periodic registration update procedure is also not performed. New registration at change of PLMN is required;

e) the 5GMM over non-3GPP access in the UE considers that the N1 NAS signalling connection is established when the lower layers indicate that the access stratum connection is established succcessfully;

f) the UE-initiated service request procedure via non-3GPP access is supported. Upon indication from the lower layers of non-3GPP access, that the access stratum connection is established between the UE and the network, the UE in 5GMM-REGISTERED state and in 5GMM-IDLE mode over non-3GPP access shall initiate the service request procedure via non-3GPP access. The UE may indicate with the service request message the PDU session(s) associated with non-3GPP access to re-establish user-plane resources for which the UE has pending user data to be sent;

g) paging procedure is not performed via non-3GPP access;

h) service area restrictions do not apply for non-3GPP access other than the wireline access;

i) the establishment cause for non-3GPP access is determined according to subclause4.7.2.2;

j) eCall inactivity procedure is not performed via non-3GPP access;

k) local area data network (LADN) does not apply for non-3GPP access;

l) the Allowed PDU session IE shall not be included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message or the SERVICE REQUEST message sent over non-3GPP access;

m) DRX parameters do not apply for non-3GPP access;

n) Mobile initiated connection only mode (MICO) does not apply for non-3GPP access;

o) CIoT 5GS optimizations do not apply for non-3GPP access;

p) unified access control does not apply for non-3GPP access;

q) UE radio capability signalling optimisation (RACS) does not apply for non-3GPP access;

r) Closed access group (CAG) does not apply for non-3GPP access; and

s) the N1 NAS signalling connection release, the paging indication for voice services and reject the paging request do not apply for non-3GPP access. The Paging restriction IE shall not be included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, the SERVICE REQUEST message or the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message sent over non-3GPP access. The AMF shall not delete any stored paging restriction preferences for the UE and shall not stop restricting paging when receiving REGISTRATION REQUEST message, SERVICE REQUEST message or CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message over non-3GPP access.

4.7.2.2 Establishment cause for non-3GPP access

When establishment of an N1 NAS signalling connection over non-3GPP access is initiated, the UE shall:

a) determine one or more access identities to be associated with the establishment of the N1 NAS signalling connection as specified in subclause4.5.2 and table4.5.2.1;

b) select the establishment cause for non-3GPP access from the determined one or more access identities and the event which triggered initiation of the N1 NAS signalling connection over non-3GPP access by checking the rules specified in table4.7.2.2.1; and

c) provide the selected establishment cause for non-3GPP access to the lower layers.

While an MMTEL voice call is ongoing:

- any:

1) service request procedure; or

2) registration procedure;

 initiated in 5GMM-IDLE mode is mapped to "MO MMTel voice call" type access attempt.

While an MMTEL video call is ongoing and no MMTEL voice call is ongoing:

- any:

1) service request procedure; or

2) registration procedure;

 initiated in 5GMM-IDLE mode is mapped to "MO MMTel video call" type access attempt.

While an SMSoIP is ongoing, no MMTEL video call is ongoing and no MMTEL voice call is ongoing:

- any:

1) service request procedure; or

2) registration procedure;

 initiated in 5GMM-IDLE mode is mapped to "MO SMS over IP" type access attempt.

If the access attempt matches more than one rule, the establishment cause for non-3GPP access of the lowest rule number shall be used.

Table4.7.2.2.1: Mapping table for determination of establishment cause for non-3GPP access

Rule #

Access identities

Type of access attempt

Requirements to be met

Establishment cause for non-3GPP access

1

1

Any

Any

mps-PriorityAccess

2

2

Any

Any

mcs-PriorityAccess

3

11, 15

Any

Any

highPriorityAccess

4

12,13,14,

Any

Any

highPriorityAccess

5

0

Emergency

UE is attempting access for an emergency session (NOTE1)

emergency





UE NAS initiated 5GMM specific procedures

Access attempt is for MO signalling

mo-Signalling





UE NAS initiated 5GMM connection management procedures or 5GMM NAS transport procedure

Access attempt is for MO data

mo-Data





MO SMS over NAS or MO SMS over IP

Access attempt is for MO SMS over NAS or MO SMS over IP

mo-SMS





MO MMTel voice call

Access attempt is for MO MMTel voice call 

mo-VoiceCall





MO MMTel video call

Access attempt is for MO MMTel video call 

mo-Videocall

NOTE1: This includes 5GMM specific procedures while the service is ongoing and 5GMM connection management procedures required to establish a PDU session with request type = "initial emergency request" or "existing emergency PDU session", or to re-establish user-plane resources for such a PDU session.

NOTE2: See subclause4.5.2, table4.5.2.1 for use of the access identities of 0, 1, 2, and 11-15.



4.7.3 5GS session management aspects

The session management procedures defined over 3GPP access are re-used over non-3GPP access with the following exceptions:

The session management procedures defined over 3GPP access are re-used over non-3GPP access with the following exceptions:

a) Serving PLMN rate control does not apply for non-3GPP access;

b) Small data rate control does not apply for non-3GPP access;

c) Handling of 5GSM cause value #82 "maximum data rate per UE for user-plane integrity protection is too low" does not apply for non-3GPP access;

d) MBS does not apply for non-3GPP access; and

e) Support of redundant PDU sessions does not apply for non-3GPP access.

4.7.4 Limited service state over non-3GPP access

There are a number of situations in which the UE is unable to obtain normal service from a PLMN over non-3GPP access and the UE enters the limited service state over non-3GPP access. These include:

a) no USIM in the ME;

b) an "illegal UE" or "illegal ME" is received when registration, network-initiated de-registration or service request is performed (any USIM in the ME is then considered "invalid");

c) a "5GS services not allowed" is received when a registration, network-initiated de-registration or service request is performed;

d) a "PLMN not allowed" is received when registration, network-initiated de-registration or service request is performed;

e) a "Tracking area not allowed" is received when a registration, network-initiated de-registration or service request is performed;

f) a "Roaming not allowed in this tracking area" is received when a registration, network-initiated de-registration or service request is performed;

g) void; or

h) a "Serving network not authorized" is received when a registration or service request is performed.

In limited service state with a valid USIM in the UE, the network selection is performed as defined in 3GPPTS24.502[18].

With the exception of performing initial registration for emergency services, no registration requests are made until a valid USIM is present. For registration for emergency services, the PLMN of the current N3IWF or TNGF is considered as the selected PLMN for the duration the UE is registered for emergency services.

4.7.5 NAS signalling using trusted WLAN access network

A trusted WLAN interworking function (TWIF) provides functionalities for a non-5G capable over WLAN (N5CW) device to access 5GCN, including:

a) NAS signalling over N1 NAS signalling connection with AMF; and

b) PDU session establishment, modification and release on behalf of the N5CW device, over N2 connection with the AMF.

The TWIF registers on behalf of the N5CW device to an AMF according to subclause5.5.1.3 by populating the parameters for the registration by using implementation specific default values which are the same for N5CW devices.

The TWIF may request to establish a PDU session as specified in subclause6.4.1.2 on behalf of the N5CW device upon receipt of an IP configuration request from the N5CW device by populating either all the required parameters or part of the required parameters for the PDU session establishment by using implementation specific default values from the TWIF's configuration. Only one PDU session is supported when N5CW device accessing 5GC via the TWIF.

NOTE1: If part of the required parameters for the PDU session establishment is provided by the TWIF, the remaining of the required parameters are determined by the AMF or the SMF based on the N5CW device's subscription information.

Upon loss of the IP address of the N5CW device, the TWIF acting on behalf of the N5CW device shall initiate the UE-requested PDU session release procedure as defined in subclause6.4.3.

NOTE2: The established PDU session on behalf of the N5CW device can be modified by the TWIF or the network.

4.8 Interworking with E-UTRAN connected to EPC

4.8.1 General

In order to interwork with E-UTRAN connected to EPC, the UE supporting both S1 mode and N1 mode can operate in single-registration mode or dual-registration mode (see 3GPPTS23.501[8]). Support of single-registration mode is mandatory for UEs supporting both S1 mode and N1 mode.

During the EPS attach procedure (see 3GPPTS24.301[15]) or initial registration procedure (see subclause5.5.1.2), the mode for interworking is selected if the UE supports both S1 mode and N1 mode, and the network supports interworking. The mode for interworking may also be selected during the EPS tracking area updating procedure (see 3GPPTS24.301[15]) or registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update (see subclause5.5.1.3).

For interworking between E-UTRAN connected to EPC and TNGF or N3IWF connected to 5GCN, the UE shall operate as specified in either subclause4.8.2.3 or subclause4.8.3. Which subclause the UE follows is chosen by the UE irrespective of the interworking without N26 interface indicator.

4.8.2 Single-registration mode

4.8.2.1 General

If the UE receives the indication that "interworking without N26 interface not supported" (see 3GPPTS24.301[15]), the UE operates as described in subclause4.8.2.2.

If the UE receives the indication that "interworking without N26 interface supported" and

a) the UE does not support dual-registration mode; or

b) the UE supporting dual-registration mode determines to operate in single-registration mode,

the UE operates as described in subclause4.8.2.3.

4.8.2.2 Single-registration mode with N26 interface

See subclause5.1.4.2 for coordination between 5GMM and EMM and subclause6.1.4.1 for coordination between 5GSM and ESM.

4.8.2.3 Single-registration mode without N26 interface

4.8.2.3.1 Interworking between NG-RAN and E-UTRAN

At inter-system change from N1 mode to S1 mode in EMM-IDLE mode when:

a) the UE supports non-IP PDN type and at least one PDU session of Unstructured PDU session type is active;

b) the UE supports IPv4 PDN type and at least one PDU session of IPv4 PDU session type is active;

c) the UE supports IPv6 PDN type and at least one PDU session of IPv6 PDU session type is active;

d) the UE supports IPv4v6 PDN type and at least one PDU session of IPv4v6 PDU session type is active; or

e) at least one PDU session of Ethernet PDU session type is active and:

1) the UE supports non-IP PDN type; or

2) the UE and the network support Ethernet PDN type in S1 mode;

the UE shall proceed as follows:

a) if the UE supports sending an ATTACH REQUEST message containing a PDN CONNECTIVITY REQUEST message with request type set to "handover" or "handover of emergency bearer services" to transfer a PDU session from N1 mode to S1 mode and the UE has received an "interworking without N26 interface supported" indication from the network, the UE shall:

1) enter substates EMM-DEREGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE and 5GMM- DEREGISTERED.NO-CELL-AVAILABLE for 3GPP access;

2) map the PDU session(s) which the UE intends to transfer to EPS to the default EPS bearer context of the corresponding PDN connection(s) as specified in subclause6.1.4.2; and

3) initiate an EPS attach procedure and include in the ATTACH REQUEST message a PDN CONNECTIVITY REQUEST message with:

- the request type set to "handover of emergency bearer services" to activate a default EPS bearer context for an active emergency PDU session, if the session to be transferred is an emergency PDU session; or

- the request type set to "handover" message to activate a default EPS bearer context for an active non-emergency PDU session, if the session to be transferred is a non-emergency PDU session. If the selected PDU session is an MA PDU session established over 3GPP access, the UE shall include the ATSSS request parameter in the Protocol configuration options IE or the Extended protocol configuration options IE of the ESM INFORMATION RESPONSE message.

 After successful completion of the EPS attach procedure, the UE shall reset the registration attempt counter for 3GPP access and the attach attempt counter (see 3GPPTS24.301[15]) and attempt to activate each of the other default EPS bearer contexts, if any, by initiating a stand-alone PDN connectivity procedure with request type set to "handover" for non-emergency PDU session or "handover of emergency bearer services" for emergency PDU session in the PDN CONNECTIVITY REQUEST message; and

b) otherwise, enter substates EMM-REGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE and 5GMM-REGISTERED.NO-CELL-AVAILABLE for 3GPP access and initiate a tracking area update procedure (see 3GPPTS24.301[15]).

At inter-system change from N1 mode to S1 mode in EMM-IDLE mode when:

a) the UE does not support non-IP PDN type or no PDU session of Unstructured PDU session type is active;

b) the UE does not support IPv4 PDN type or no PDU session of IPv4 PDU session type is active;

c) the UE does not support IPv6 PDN type or no PDU session of IPv6 PDU session type is active;

d) the UE does not support IPv4v6 PDN type or no PDU session of IPv4v6 PDU session type is active; and

e) no PDU session of Ethernet PDU session type is active or:

1) the UE does not support non-IP PDN type; and

2) the UE, the network or both do not support Ethernet PDN type in S1 mode;

the UE shall enter substates EMM-DEREGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE and 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.NO-CELL-AVAILABLE for 3GPP access, and initiate an attach procedure.

At inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode in 5GMM-IDLE mode, the UE shall:

a) enter substate 5GMM-REGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE for 3GPP access and substate EMM-REGISTERED.NO-CELL-AVAILABLE;

b) map the default EPS bearer context(s) of the PDN connection(s) which the UE intends to transfer to 5GS, if any, to the corresponding PDU session(s) as specified in subclause6.1.4.2; and

c) initiate the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update over 3GPP access indicating "mobility registration updating" in the 5GS registration type IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message (see subclause5.5.1.3).

After having successfully registered in N1 mode over 3GPP access, the UE shall reset the registration attempt counter for 3GPP access, and the attach attempt counter or tracking area updating attempt counter (see 3GPPTS24.301[15]) and:

a) if the UE supports the PDU session establishment procedure with request type set to "existing PDU session" or "existing emergency PDU session" to transfer a PDN connection from S1 mode to N1 mode and the UE has received an "interworking without N26 interface supported" indication from the network, attempt to transfer the PDN connection(s) which the UE intends to transfer to 5GS, if any, from S1 mode to N1 mode by:

- if the PDN connection which the UE intends to transfer is a PDN connection for emergency bearer services, initiating the PDU session establishment procedure with request type set to "existing emergency PDU session" to transfer the PDN connection for emergency bearer services; and

- if the PDN connection which the UE intends to transfer is a non-emergency PDN connection, initiating the PDU session establishment procedure with request type set to:

1) "MA PDU request", if the PDN connection to be transferred is a user-plane resource of an MA PDU session; or

2) "existing PDU session" to transfer the non-emergency PDN connection; and

b) otherwise, establish PDU session(s) corresponding to the PDN connection(s) which the UE intends to transfer to 5GS, if any, by initiating the PDU session establishment procedure with request type set to "initial request".

See subclause5.1.4.3 for coordination between 5GMM and EMM and subclause6.1.4.2 for coordination between 5GSM and ESM.

If:

a) the UE has registered in neither N1 mode over 3GPP access nor S1 mode yet; and

b) the UE has at least one active PDU session associated with non-3GPP access which the UE intends to transfer to EPS,

the UE shall initiate an EPS attach procedure and include a PDN CONNECTIVITY REQUEST message with a request type in the ATTACH REQUEST message to activate a default EPS bearer context for one of the active PDU sessions which the UE intends to transfer to EPS (see 3GPPTS24.301[15]). The request type is set as follows:

- if the PDU session which the UE intends to transfer is a non-emergency PDU session, the request type is set to "handover"; and

- if the PDU session which the UE intends to transfer is an emergency PDU session, the request type is set to "handover of emergency bearer services" and the default bearer to be activated is the default EPS bearer context for the emergency PDU session.

NOTE1: It is necessary for the UE to support sending an ATTACH REQUEST message containing a PDN CONNECTIVITY REQUEST message with request type set to "handover" or "handover of emergency bearer services" to transfer a PDU session from N1 mode to S1 mode for interworking between TNGF or N3IWF connected to 5GCN and E-UTRAN.

NOTE2: The order of PDU sessions to be tranferred to EPS is up to UE implementation.

After successful completion of the EPS attach procedure where the activated default EPS bearer context is not for emergency service, the UE shall initiate a UE requested PDN connectivity procedure with request type set to "handover" for non-emergency PDU session or "handover of emergency bearer services" for emergency PDU session in the PDN CONNECTIVITY REQUEST message to transfer each of the other PDU sessions which the UE intends to transfer to EPS, if any.

If:

a) the UE has not registered in N1 mode over non-3GPP access yet; and

b) the UE has at least one active PDN connection which the UE intends to transfer to TNGF or N3IWF connected to 5GCN,

the UE shall initiate an initial registration procedure over non-3GPP access (see subclause5.5.1.2).

After successful completion of the 5GS initial registration in N1 mode over non-3GPP access, the UE shall initiate a UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure with a request type to transfer each of the PDN connections which the UE intends to transfer to TNGF or N3IWF connected to 5GCN, if any. The request type is set as follows:

- if the PDN connection which the UE intends to transfer is a PDN connection for emergency bearer services, the request type is set to "existing emergency PDU session" to transfer the PDN connection for emergency bearer services; and

- if the PDN connection which the UE intends to transfer is a non-emergency PDN connection, the request type is set to "existing PDU session" to transfer the non-emergency PDN connection.

NOTE3: If the UE has no active PDU session associated with non-3GPP access which the UE in N1 mode intends to transfer to EPS or no active PDN connection associated with 3GPP access which the UE in S1 mode intends to transfer to TNGF or N3IWF connected to 5GCN, the interworking between TNGF or N3IWF connected to 5GCN and E-UTRAN is not supported.

See subclause6.1.4.2 for coordination between 5GSM and ESM.

4.8.3 Dual-registration mode

If both 5GMM and EMM are enabled, a UE, operating in the dual-registration mode shall maintain independent contexts for 5GMM and EMM and this includes independent lists of equivalent PLMNs. Coordination between 5GMM and EMM is not needed, except as specified in the present subclause, subclause5.1.5 and 5.3.13A.

For dual-registration mode the following applies:

a) a UE operating in the dual-registration mode may register to N1 mode only, S1 mode only, or to both N1 mode and S1 mode;

b) when the UE decides to operate in dual-registration mode (see subclause5.5.1.2.4), NAS informs the lower layers about this;

c) if a UE is registered in N1 mode only, then for registration in S1 mode the UE shall use:

1) the same PLMN to which it is registered in N1 mode; or

2) an equivalent PLMN; and

d) if a UE is registered in S1 mode only, then for registration in N1 mode the UE shall use:

1) the same PLMN to which it is registered in S1 mode; or

2) an equivalent PLMN.

NOTE1: It is up to UE implementation how to handle the case when the UE is registered in both N1 mode and S1 mode and the PLMNs to which the UE is registered, are not equivalent, e.g. search for a PLMN which is the same or equivalent to any of the registered ones.

When no PDU session is active and the UE has not registered to S1 mode yet, the UE may initiate the EPS attach procedure with PDN connection establishment if EMM-REGISTERED without PDN connection is not supported by the MME. If EMM-REGISTERED without PDN connection is supported by the MME, the UE may initiate either the EPS attach procedure without PDN connection establishment or the attach procedure with PDN connection establishment.

When at least one PDU session is active and the UE has not registered to S1 mode yet, the UE may initiate the EPS attach procedure. If necessary, the UE may transfer an active PDU session from N1 mode to S1 mode by initiating the EPS attach procedure with request type set to "handover" in the PDN CONNECTIVITY REQUEST message. After successfully attached in S1 mode, if necessary, the UE may transfer other active PDU sessions from N1 mode to S1 mode by initiating the PDN connectivity procedure with request type set to "handover" in the PDN CONNECTIVITY REQUEST message.

NOTE2: It is up to UE implementation to determine which active PDU session is transferred from N1 mode to S1 mode.

When the UE has not registered to N1 mode, the UE may initiate the initial registration procedure. After successfully registered in N1 mode, if necessary, the UE may transfer one or more active PDN connections from S1 mode to N1 mode by initiating the PDU session establishment procedure with request type set to "existing PDU session".

NOTE3: It is up to UE implementation to determine which active PDN connection is transferred from S1 mode to N1 mode.

If the MME supports EMM-REGISTERED without PDN connection, the UE that transferred all PDN connections to the 5GS, may stay in state EMM-REGISTERED. Otherwise, the UE shall enter state EMM-DEREGISTERED upon transferring all PDN connection to the 5GS.

NOTE4: When the UE has registered in both N1 mode and S1 mode, it is up to UE implementation to maintain the registration update to date in both N1 mode and S1 mode.

See subclause6.1.4 for coordination between 5GSM and ESM.

See subclause4.8.2.3.2 for interworking between TNGF or N3IWF connected to 5GCN and E-UTRAN.

4.8.4 Core Network selection for UEs not using CIoT 5GS optimizations

If the UE is capable of both N1 mode and S1 mode, when the UE needs to use one or more functionalities not supported in 5GS but supported in EPS and the UE is in 5GMM-IDLE mode, the UE may disable the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access (see subclause4.9.2).

If the UE is capable of both N1 mode and S1 mode and lower layers provide an indication that the current E-UTRA cell is connected to both EPC and 5GCN without also providing an indication that a target core network type was received from the NG-RAN, the UE shall select a core network type (EPC or 5GCN) based on the PLMN selection procedures as specified in 3GPPTS23.122[5] and provide the selected core network type information to the lower layer during the initial registration procedure.

If the UE is capable of both N1 mode and S1 mode and the lower layers have provided an indication that the current E-UTRA cell is connected to both EPC and 5GCN and an indication of whether the network supports IMS emergency services via either EPC or 5GCN or both (see 3GPPTS36.331[25A]), the UE selects a core network type (EPC or 5GCN) as specified in 3GPPTS23.167[6] annexH.2 for initiating emergency calls when in the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE or EMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE.

NOTE1: If the PLMN selection information provisioned in the USIM does not contain any prioritization between E-UTRAN and NG-RAN for a PLMN, which core network type to select for that PLMN is up to UE implementation.

If the UE is capable of both N1 mode and S1 mode and lower layers provide an indication that the current E-UTRA cell is connected to both EPC and 5GCN with:

1) an indication that target core network type EPC was received from the NG-RAN, the UE shall select the EPC and proceed with the appropriate EMM procedure as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15]; or

2) an indication that target core network type 5GCN was received from the NG-RAN, the UE shall select the 5GCN and proceed with the appropriate 5GMM procedure.

NOTE2: The NG-RAN can provide a target core network type to the UE during RRC connection release with redirection (see 3GPPTS36.331[25A] and 3GPPTS38.331[30]).

4.8.4A Core Network selection and redirection for UEs using CIoT optimizations

4.8.4A.1 Core network selection

A UE that supports CIoT optimizations performs core network selection (i.e. it selects EPC or 5GCN) if the lower layers have provided an indication that the current E-UTRA cell is connected to both EPC and 5GCN as specified in 3GPPTS23.501[8].

When selecting a PLMN as described in 3GPPTS23.122[5], the UE shall select a core network type (EPC or 5GCN) based on:

a) indication from the lower layers about the CIoT EPS optimizations supported in EPC;

b) indication from the lower layers about the CIoT 5GS optimizations supported in 5GCN;

c) the CIoT EPS optimizations supported by the UE;

d) the CIoT 5GS optimizations supported by the UE;

e) the UE's preferred CIoT network behaviour for EPC; and

f) the UE's preferred CIoT network behaviour for 5GCN.

The UE shall provide the selected core network type information to the lower layer during the initial registration procedure.

4.8.4A.2 Redirection of the UE by the core network

The network that supports CIoT optimizations can redirect a UE between EPC and 5GCN as specified in subclause5.31.3 of 3GPPTS23.501[8]. The network can take into account the UE's N1 mode capability or S1 mode capability, the CIoT network behaviour supported and preferred by the UE or the CIoT network behaviour supported by the network to determine the redirection.

NOTE: It is assumed that the network would avoid redirecting the UE back and forth between EPC and 5GCN.

The network redirects the UE to EPC by rejecting the registration request or service request with the 5GMM cause #31 "Redirection to EPC required" as specified in subclause5.5.1.2.5,5.5.1.3.5 and5.6.1.5. Upon receipt of reject message, the UE disables the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access as specified in subclause4.9.2 and enables the E-UTRA capability if it was disabled in order to move to EPC.

When there is no ongoing registration procedure or service request procedure for a UE in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode, if the AMF determines to redirect the UE to EPC, the AMF shall initiate the generic UE configuration update procedure to indicate registration requested and release of the N1 NAS signalling connection not requested as described in subclause5.4.4. The network then redirects the UE to EPC by rejecting the registration request as specified in subclause5.5.1.3.5.

The network that supports CIoT optimizations can also redirect a UE from EPC to 5GCN as specified in subclause5.3.19.2 of 3GPPTS24.301[15].

4.9 Disabling and re-enabling of UE's N1 mode capability

4.9.1 General

The UE shall re-enable the N1 mode capability when the UE powers off and powers on again, the USIM is removed or an entry of the "list of subscriber data" with the SNPN identity of the SNPN is updated.

4.9.2 Disabling and re-enabling of UE's N1 mode capability for 3GPP access

The UE shall only disable the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access when in 5GMM-IDLE mode.

When the UE is disabling the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access for a PLMN not due to redirection to EPC, it should proceed as follows:

a) select an E-UTRA cell connected to EPC of the registered PLMN or a PLMN from the list of equivalent PLMNs, if the UE supports S1 mode and the UE has not disabled its E-UTRA capability as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15];

b) if an E-UTRA cell connected to EPC of the registered PLMN or a PLMN from the list of equivalent PLMNs cannot be found, the UE does not support S1 mode or the UE has disabled its E-UTRA capability as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15], the UE may select another RAT of the registered PLMN or a PLMN from the list of equivalent PLMNs that the UE supports;

c) if another RAT of the registered PLMN or a PLMN from the list of equivalent PLMNs cannot be found, then enter the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH or 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH, or the UE does not have a registered PLMN, then enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH and perform PLMN selection as specified in 3GPPTS23.122[5]. If disabling of the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access was not due to a UE-initiated de-registration procedure for 5GS services over 3GPP access not due to switch-off, the UE may re-enable the N1 capability for this PLMN selection. As an implementation option, if the UE does not have a registered PLMN, instead of performing PLMN selection, the UE may select another RAT of the selected PLMN if the UE has chosen a PLMN and the RAT is supported by the UE; or

d) if no other allowed PLMN and RAT combinations are available, then the UE may re-enable the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access and indicate to lower layers to remain camped in NG-RAN of the registered PLMN, and may periodically scan for another PLMN and RAT combination which can provide EPS services or non-EPS services (if the UE supports EPS services or non-EPS services). How this periodic scanning is done, is UE implementation dependent.

When the UE is disabling the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access for an SNPN, it should proceed as follows:

a) enter the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH or 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH and perform SNPN selection as specified in 3GPPTS23.122[5]. If disabling of the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access was not due to a UE-initiated de-registration procedure for 5GS services over 3GPP access not due to switch-off, the UE may re-enable the N1 capability for this SNPN selection; or

b) if no other SNPN is available, then the UE may re-enable the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access and indicate to lower layers to remain camped in NG-RAN of the registered SNPN.

When the UE is disabling the N1 mode capability upon receiving cause value #31 "Redirection to EPC required" as specified in subclauses5.5.1.2.5, 5.5.1.3.5 and 5.6.1.5, it should proceed as follows:

a) If the UE is in NB-N1 mode:

1) if lower layers do not provide an indication that the current E-UTRA cell is connected to EPC or lower layers do not provide an indication that the current E-UTRA cell supports CIoT EPS optimizations that are supported by the UE, search for a suitable NB-IoT cell connected to EPC according to 3GPPTS36.304[25C];

2) if lower layers provide an indication that the current E-UTRA cell is connected to EPC and the current E-UTRA cell supports CIoT EPS optimizations that are supported by the UE, perform a core network selection to select EPC as specified in subclause4.8.4A.1; or

3) if lower layers cannot find a suitable NB-IoT cell connected to EPC or there is no suitable NB-IoT cell connected to EPC which supports CIoT EPS optimizations that are supported by the UE, the UE, as an implementation option, may indicate to lower layers to remain camped in E-UTRA cell connected to 5GCN, may then start an implementation-specific timer and enter the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE. The UE may may re-enable the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access at expiry of the implementation-specific timer, if the timer had been started, and may then proceed with the appropriate 5GMM procedure.

b) If the UE is in WB-N1 mode:

1) if lower layers do not provide an indication that the current E-UTRA cell is connected to EPC or lower layers do not provide an indication that the current E-UTRA cell supports CIoT EPS optimizations that are supported by the UE, search for a suitable E-UTRA cell connected to EPC according to 3GPPTS36.304[25C];

2) if lower layers provide an indication that the current E-UTRA cell is connected to EPC and the current E-UTRA cell supports CIoT EPS optimizations that are supported by the UE, then perform a core network selection to select EPC as specified in subclause4.8.4A.1; or

3) if lower layers cannot find a suitable E-UTRA cell connected to EPC or there is no suitable E-UTRA cell connected to EPC which supports CIoT EPS optimizations that are supported by the UE, the UE, as an implementation option, may indicate to lower layers to remain camped in E-UTRA cell connected to 5GCN, may then start an implementation-specific timer and enter the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE. The UE may re-enable the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access at expiry of the implementation-specific timer, if the timer had been started, and may then proceed with the appropriate 5GMM procedure.

When the UE supporting both N1 mode and S1 mode needs to stay in E-UTRA connected to EPC (e.g. due to the domain selection for UE originating sessions as specified in subclause4.3.2), in order to prevent unintentional handover or cell reselection from E-UTRA connected to EPC to NG-RAN connected to 5GCN, the UE operating in single-registration mode shall disable the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access and:

a) shall set the N1mode bit to "N1 mode for 3GPP access not supported" in the UE network capability IE (see 3GPPTS24.301[15]) of the ATTACH REQUEST message and the TRACKING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message in EPC; and

b) the UE NAS layer shall indicate the access stratum layer(s) of disabling of the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access.

If the UE is required to disable the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access and select E-UTRA or another RAT, and the UE is in the 5GMM-CONNECTED mode,

- if the UE has a persistent PDU session, then the UE waits until the radio bearer associated with the persistent PDU session has been released;

- otherwise the UE shall locally release the established NAS signalling connection;

and enter the 5GMM-IDLE mode before selecting E-UTRA or another RAT.

If the UE is disabling its N1 mode capability for 3GPP access before selecting E-UTRA or another RAT, the UE shall not perform the UE-initiated de-registration procedure of subclause5.5.2.2.

The UE shall re-enable the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access when the UE performs PLMN or SNPN selection over 3GPP access, unless

- disabling of the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access was due to a UE-initiated de-registration procedure for 5GS services over 3GPP access not due to switch-off; or

- the UE has already re-enabled the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access when performing items c) or d) above.

If the disabling of N1 mode capability for 3GPP access was due to IMS voice is not available over 3GPP access and the UE's usage setting is "voice centric", the UE shall re-enable the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access when the UE's usage setting is changed from "voice centric" to "data centric", as specified in subclauses4.3.3.

The UE should memorize the identity of the PLMN or SNPN where N1 mode capability for 3GPP access was disabled and should use that stored information in subsequent PLMN or SNPN selections as specified in 3GPPTS23.122[5].

If the disabling of N1 mode capability for 3GPP access was due to successful completion of an emergency services fallback, the criteria to enable the N1 mode capability again are UE implementation specific.

The UE shall disable the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access if requested by the upper layers (e.g. see subclauseU.2.2.6.4 in 3GPPTS24.229[14]). If the UE disabled the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access based on the request from the upper layers (e.g. see subclauseU.2.2.6.4 in 3GPPTS24.229[14]), the criteria to re-enable the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access after the completion of an emergency service are UE implementation specific.

If the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access was disabled due to the UE initiated de-registration procedure for 3GPP access or for 3GPP access and non-3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode (see subclause5.5.2.2.3), upon request of the upper layers to re-register for 5GS services over 3GPP access the UE shall enable the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access again.

As an implementation option, the UE may start a timer for enabling the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access when the UE's registration attempt counter reaches 5 and the UE disables the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access for cases described in subclauses5.5.1.2.7 and 5.5.1.3.7. The UE should memorize the identity of the PLMNs where N1 mode capability for 3GPP access was disabled. On expiry of this timer:

- if the UE is in Iu mode or A/Gb mode and is in idle mode as specified in 3GPPTS24.008[13] on expiry of the timer, the UE should enable the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access;

- if the UE is in Iu mode and a PS signalling connection exists, but no RR connection exists, the UE may abort the PS signalling connection before enabling the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access; and

- if the UE is in S1 mode and is in EMM-IDLE mode as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15], on expiry of the timer, the UE should enable the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access.

If the UE is in Iu mode or A/Gb mode and an RR connection exists, the UE should delay enabling the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access until the RR connection is released. If the UE is in S1 mode and is in EMM-CONNECTED mode as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15], the UE should delay enabling the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access until the NAS signalling connection in S1 mode is released.

The UE may disable the N1 mode capability for currently camped PLMN or SNPN over 3GPP access (see 3GPPTS23.122[5]) if no network slice is available for the camped PLMN or SNPN.

If the UE attempts to establish an emergency PDU session in a PLMN where N1 mode capability was disabled due to the UE's registration attempt counter have reached5, the UE may enable N1 mode capability for that PLMN memorized by the UE.

NOTE: If N1 mode capability is disabled due to the UE's registration attempt counter reaches5, the value of the timer for re-enabling N1 mode capability is recommended to be the same as the value of T3502 which follows the handling specified in subclause5.3.8.

4.9.3 Disabling and re-enabling of UE's N1 mode capability for non-3GPP access

When the UE disables the N1 mode capability for non-3GPP access, the UE NAS layer shall not initiate any 5GS NAS procedures towards the network over non-3GPP access.

When the UE supporting both N1 mode and S1 mode needs to stay in non-3GPP access connected to EPC (e.g. due to the domain selection for UE originating sessions as specified in subclause4.3.2), in order to prevent unintentional selection of a non-3GPP access network connected to 5GCN, the UE operating in single-registration mode shall not transfer any PDN connection to a non-3GPP access network connected to the 5GCN.

If the disabling of N1 mode capability for non-3GPP access was due to IMS voice is not available over non-3GPP access in 5GS and the UE's usage setting is "voice centric", the UE shall re-enable the N1 mode capability for non-3GPP access when the UE's usage setting is changed from "voice centric" to "data centric" as specified in subclauses4.3.3.

The UE shall re-enable the N1 mode capability for non-3GPP access when a new PLMN or SNPN is selected over non-3GPP access.

NOTE: In SNPN, the term "UE's N1 mode capability for non-3GPP access" in this subclause refers to the UE's N1 mode capability to access SNPN services via a PLMN.

The UE may disable the N1 mode capability for the currently camped PLMN or SNPN over non-3GPP access if no network slice is available for the camped PLMN or SNPN.

As an implementation option, the UE may start a timer for re-enabling the N1 mode capability for non-3GPP access, after the N1 mode capability for non-3GPP access was disabled. On the expiry of this timer, the UE should re-enable the N1 mode capability for non-3GPP access.

4.10 Interworking with ePDG connected to EPC

In order to interwork with ePDG connected to EPC, the UE shall operate as specified in either subclause4.8.2.3 or subclause4.8.3. Which subclause the UE follows is chosen by the UE irrespective of the interworking without N26 interface indicator.

The UE shall not attempt to transfer PDU sessions with PDU session type "Ethernet" or "Unstructured" to an ePDG connected to EPC.

NOTE: PDU sessions with PDU session type "Ethernet" or "Unstructured" cannot be transferred to an ePDG connected to EPC because PDN connections with PDN type "non-IP" or PDN type "Ethernet" are not supported over ePDG connected to EPC.

4.11 UE configuration parameter updates

The 5GS in a PLMN supports updating UE parameters via NAS signalling. The feature enables the HPLMN to securely and dynamically re-configure the UE configuration parameters stored on the USIM and the ME.

- In this release of the specification, updates of the following USIM configuration parameters are supported:

- routing indicator.

- In this release of specification, updates of the following ME configuration parameters are supported:

- default configured NSSAI.

- disaster roaming information.

The 5GS in an SNPN supports updating UE parameters via NAS signalling. The feature enables the SNPN to securely and dynamically re-configure the UE configuration parameter stored on the USIM if the UE used the USIM for registration to the SNPN.

- In this release of the specification, updates of the following USIM configuration parameters are supported:

- routing indicator.

- In this release of specification, updates of the following ME configuration parameters are supported:

- routing indicator.

- default configured NSSAI.

The update of UE configuration parameters is initiated by the network using the network-initiated downlink NAS transport procedure as described in subclause5.4.5.3. The ME acknowledgement of successful reception of the updated UE configuration parameter information is sent back to the network using the UE-initiated uplink NAS transport procedure as described in subclause5.4.5.2.

4.12 Access traffic steering, switching and splitting (ATSSS)

The ATSSS feature is an optional feature that may be supported by the UE and the 5GCN.

The ATSSS feature enables a multi-access PDU connectivity service, which can exchange PDUs between the UE and a data network by simultaneously using one 3GPP access network and one non-3GPP access network. The multi-access PDU connectivity service is realized by establishing a multi-access PDU session, i.e. a PDU session that can have user-plane resources on two access networks.

NOTE: MA PDU session is not applicable for CIoT 5GS optimization in this release of specification.

The UE can request an MA PDU session when the UE is registered via both 3GPP and non-3GPP accesses, or when the UE is registered via one access only. The MA PDU session management is performed based on the PDU session management procedures.

The detailed description of the procedures for ATSSS between the UE and the network across one 3GPP access network and one non-3GPP access network are specified in 3GPPTS24.193[13B].

4.13 Support of NAS signalling using wireline access network

A 5G-RG, a W-AGF acting on behalf of an FN-RG or a W-AGF acting on behalf of an N5GC device can use wireline access network to access the 5GCN by using NAS signalling procedures as described in 3GPPTS23.501[8], 3GPPTS23.502[9] and 3GPPTS23.316[6D].

Wireline access is a type of non-3GPP access.

A 5G-RG simultaneously connected to the same 5GCN of a PLMN over a 3GPP access and a wireline access is connected to a single AMF.

5G-RG maintains the N1 NAS signalling connection with the AMF over the wireline access network after all the PDU sessions for the 5G-RG over that access have been released or handed over to 3GPP access.

The 5G-RG connected to 5GCN via NG-RAN is specified in 3GPPTS23.316[6D].

When accessing the 5GCN over 3GPP access, in addition to requirements specified for the 5G-RG in the present document, the 5G-RG shall also perform requirements specified in the present document for a UE accessing 5GCN over 3GPP access. When accessing the 5GCN over wireline access, in addition to requirements specified for the 5G-RG in the present document, the 5G-RG shall also perform requirements specified in the present document for a UE accessing 5GCN over non-3GPP access. If a requirement specified for the 5G-RG in the present document contradicts a requirement specified for the UE in the present document, the 5G-RG shall perform the requirement specified in the present document for the 5G-RG.

For the scenario of FN-RG, which does not support N1 mode, the W-AGF acting on behalf of the FN-RG exchanges NAS signalling messages with an AMF.

For the scenario of N5GC device, which does not support N1 mode, the W-AGF acting on behalf of the N5GC device exchanges NAS signalling messages with an AMF.

In addition to requirements specified for the W-AGF acting on behalf of the FN-RG (or on behalf of the N5GC device) in the present document, the W-AGF acting on behalf of the FN-RG (or on behalf of the N5GC device) shall also perform requirements specified in the present document for a UE accessing 5GCN over non-3GPP access. If a requirement specified for the W-AGF acting on behalf of the FN-RG (or on behalf of the N5GC device) in the present document contradicts a requirement specified for the UE in the present document, the W-AGF acting on behalf of the FN-RG (or on behalf of the N5GC device) shall perform requirement specified in the present document for the W-AGF acting on behalf of the FN-RG (or on behalf of the N5GC device).

The PDU session authentication and authorization procedure is not supported in a PDU session established by the W-AGF acting on behalf of the FN-RG or on behalf of the N5GC device.

The W-AGF acting on behalf of the N5GC device requests the establishment of a PDU Session on behalf of the N5GC device upon registration. Only one PDU session per N5GC device is supported.

A 5G-RG or an FN-RG provide a non-3GPP access network to UEs. A UE connected to a non-3GPP access network provided by the 5G-RG or the FN-RG can access to the 5GCN via the N3IWF or via the TNGF as described in 3GPPTS23.316[6D].

The 5G-RG or the W-AGF acting on behalf of the FN-RG shall indicate "ANDSP not supported by the UE" in the UE policy classmark IE during the UE-initiated UE state indication procedure as specified in subclauseD.2.2.

4.14 Non-public network

4.14.1 General

Two types of NPN can be deployed using 5GS: SNPN (see subclause4.14.2) and PNI-NPN (see subclause4.14.3).

4.14.2 Stand-alone non-public network

If the UE is not SNPN enabled, the UE is always considered to be not operating in SNPN access operation mode. If the UE is SNPN enabled, the UE can operate in SNPN access operation mode. Details of activation and deactivation of SNPN access operation mode at the SNPN enabled UE are up to UE implementation.

The functions and procedures of NAS described in the present document are applicable to an SNPN and an SNPN enabled UE unless indicated otherwise. The key differences brought by the SNPN to the NAS layer are as follows:

a) instead of the PLMN selection process, the SNPN selection process is performed by a UE operating in SNPN access operation mode (see 3GPPTS23.122[5] for further details on the SNPN selection);

b) a "permanently forbidden SNPNs" list and a "temporarily forbidden SNPNs" list are managed per access type independently (i.e. 3GPP access or non-3GPP access) and, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, per entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the PLMN subscription, by a UE operating in SNPN access operation mode instead of forbidden PLMN lists. If the UE supports onboarding services in SNPN, an additional "permanently forbidden SNPNs" list for onboarding services and an additional "temporarily forbidden SNPNs" list for onboarding services are managed;

c) inter-system change to and from S1 mode is not supported;

d) void;

e) CAG is not supported in SNPN access operation mode;

f) with respect to the 5GMM cause values:

1) 5GMM cause values #74 "Temporarily not authorized for this SNPN" and #75 "Permanently not authorized for this SNPN" are supported whereas these 5GMM cause values cannot be used in a PLMN; and

2) 5GMM cause values #11 "PLMN not allowed", #31 "Redirection to EPC required", #73 "Serving network not authorized", and #76 "Not authorized for this CAG or authorized for CAG cells only" are not supported whereas these 5GMM cause values can be used in a PLMN;

NOTE1: The network does not send 5GMM cause value #13 to the UE operating in SNPN access operation mode in this release of specification.

g) a list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" and a list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service" are managed per SNPN and, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, entry of the "list of subscriber data" or PLMN subscription (see 3GPPTS23.122[5]);

h) when accessing SNPN services via a PLMN using 3GPP access, access to 5GCN of the SNPN is performed using 5GMM procedures for non-3GPP access, 5GMM parameters for non-3GPP access, the UE is performing access to SNPN over non-3GPP access and the UE is not operating in SNPN access mode over 3GPP access. When accessing PLMN services via a SNPN using 3GPP access, access to 5GCN of the PLMN is performed using 5GMM procedures for non-3GPP access, 5GMM parameters for non-3GPP access, the UE is not performing access to SNPN over non-3GPP access, and the UE is operating in SNPN access mode over 3GPP access. From the UE's NAS perspective, accessing PLMN services via an SNPN and accessing SNPN services via a PLMN are treated as untrusted non-3GPP access. If the UE is accessing the PLMN using non-3GPP access, the access to 5GCN of the SNPN via PLMN is not specified in this release of the specification .

 Emergency services are not supported in an SNPN when a UE accesses SNPN services via a PLMN;

NOTE2: The term "non-3GPP access" in an SNPN refers to the case where the UE is accessing SNPN services via a PLMN.

i) when registered to an SNPN, the UE shall use only the UE policies provided by the registered SNPN;

j) equivalent SNPN is not supported;

k) void;

l) void;

m) UE mobility between SNPNs in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode is not supported, UE mobility between SNPNs in 5GMM-IDLE mode is supported when the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, and UE mobility between an SNPN and a PLMN is not supported;

n) CIoT 5GS optimizations are not supported;

o) accessing SNPN services using non-3GPP access is not supported, except when accessing SNPN services via a PLMN using 3GPP access as specified in item h;

p) when registering or registered to an SNPN, the UE shall handle the 5GS mobile identity as described in subclause5.5.1.2.2;

q) when registering or registered to an SNPN, the UE shall only consider:

1) a last visited registered TAI visited in the same SNPN as an available last visited registered TAI; or

2) a last visited registered TAI visited using the same entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the same PLMN subscription as an available last visited registered TAI, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder;

NOTE3: If the last visited registered TAI is assigned by an SNPN other than the current SNPN, the serving AMF can determine the SNPN assigning the last visited registered TAI using the NID provided by the UE.

r) emergency service fallback is not supported;

s) when registering or registered for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall not provide the requested NSSAI to the network;

s1) when performing initial registration for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall set the 5GS registration type value to "SNPN onboarding registration";

t) when registering or registered for onboarding services in SNPN, the AMF shall not provide the configured NSSAI, the allowed NSSAI or the rejected NSSAI to the UE, shall use the S-NSSAI included in the AMF onboarding configuration data for onboarding services in SNPN and shall not perform NSSAA procedure for S-NSSAI used for onboarding services in SNPN;

u) the UE can access an SNPN indicating that onboarding is allowed using default UE credentials for primary authentication in order for the UE to be configured with one or more entries of the "list of subscriber data";

x) eCall over IMS is not supported in SNPN access operation mode and the UE ignores any USIM configuration for eCall only mode;

y) when registering or registered for onboarding services in SNPN, the AMF shall store in the 5GMM context of the UE an indication that the UE is registered for onboarding services in SNPN;

z) a UE with multiple valid entries of "list of subscriber data", or one or more valid USIMs and one or more valid entries of "list of subscriber data", capable of initiating and maintaining simultaneous separate registration states over 3GPP access with PLMN(s) or SNPN(s), using identities and credentials associated with those entries of "list of subscriber data", or USIMs and entries of "list of subscriber data", and supporting one or more of the N1 NAS signalling connection release, the paging indication for voice services, the reject paging request, the paging restriction and the paging timing collision control may use procedures defined for MUSIM UE, even if the UE does not include multiple valid USIMs;

za) when the UE is registering or registered for onboarding services in SNPN, the network slice admission control is not performed; and

v) proximity based services (5G ProSe as specified in 3GPPTS24.554[19E]) are not supported.

NOTE4: If the network determines that the UE cannot register to the onboarding SNPN due to lack of resources for the network slice used for onboarding, the AMF can reject the UE with 5GMM cause #22 "congestion".

4.14.3 Public network integrated non-public network (PNI-NPN)

A PNI-NPN is made available by means of e.g. dedicated DNNs or by one or more S-NSSAIs allocated for it. A CAG can be optionally used in order to prevent UEs not allowed to access a PNI-NPN from accessing the PNI-NPN. The key enablers for the CAG in the NAS layer are as follows:

a) CAG selection (see 3GPPTS23.122[5]); and

b) provisioning of a "CAG information list" as specified in 3GPPTS23.122[5], from network to UE via the generic UE configuration update procedure, the registration procedure, the service request procedure, and the network-initiated de-registration procedure.

The "CAG information list" provisioned by the network, if available, is stored in the non-volatile memory in the ME as specified in annexC. The "CAG information list" stored in the ME is kept when the UE enters 5GMM-DEREGISTERED state. AnnexC specifies condition under which the "CAG information list" stored in the ME is deleted. Additionally, when a USIM is inserted, if:

- no "CAG information list" is stored in the non-volatile memory of the ME; or

- the SUPI from the USIM does not match the SUPI stored together with the "CAG information list" in the non-volatile memory of the ME;

and the UE has a "CAG information list" stored in the USIM (see 3GPPTS31.102[22]), the UE shall store the "CAG information list" from the USIM into the ME, as specified in annexC. The "Allowed CAG list" included in the entry for the HPLMN or EHPLMN in "CAG information list" stored in the USIM can contain a range of CAG-IDs.

The UE supporting CAG may perform the initial registration for emergency services via a non-CAG cell in a PLMN for which the UE has an "indication that the UE is only allowed to access 5GS via CAG cells" or via a CAG cell that is not included in the "Allowed CAG list" (see 3GPPTS23.122[5]) for the selected PLMN. If a UE supporting CAG having an emergency PDU session is camping on:

a) a CAG cell and none of the CAG-IDs of the CAG cell are included in the "Allowed CAG list" for the current PLMN in the UE's subscription; or

b) a non-CAG cell in a PLMN for which the UE's subscription contains an "indication that the UE is only allowed to access 5GS via CAG cells";

the AMF shall behave as specified in subclause5.4.4.2, 5.5.1.3.4 or 5.6.1.4.1.

NOTE: The emergency services in a PLMN for which the UE's subscription contains an "indication that the UE is only allowed to access 5GS via CAG cells" can be subject to local regulation.

Proximity based services (5G ProSe as specified in 3GPPTS24.554[19E]) are not supported in this release of the specification when a UE is camping on a CAG cell.

4.15 Time synchronization and time sensitive communication

4.15.1 General

A 5GS can support time synchronization and TSC (see 3GPPTS23.501[8], 3GPPTS23.502[9], and 3GPPTS23.503[10]). The clause describes NAS-specific aspects of the 5GS features to support time synchronization and TSC. Interworking with EPS is not supported for a PDU session for time synchronization or TSC.

4.15.2 Void

4.15.2.1 Void

4.15.2.2 Void

4.15.2.3 Void



4.15.3 Time synchronization

Two types of synchronization processes are supported by the 5GS: 5GS synchronization and (g)PTP domain synchronization (see 3GPPTS23.501[8]).

For 5GS synchronization, the lower layers provide the 5G internal system clock signalled via the NG-RAN (see 3GPPTS38.331[30]) and the UE forwards the 5G internal system clock to the DS-TT(s).

For (g)PTP domain synchronization, the UE supports forwarding (g)PTP messages (see 3GPPTS23.501[8], 3GPPTS23.502[9], and 3GPPTS24.535[19A]). For all (g)PTP domains associated with a PDU session:

a) if the UE receives (g)PTP message via the PDU session, the UE forwards the (g)PTP messages to the DS-TT associated with the PDU session; or

b) if the UE receives (g)PTP messages from the DS-TT associated with the PDU session, the UE forwards the (g)PTP messages via the PDU session.

4.15.4 User plane node management

A 5G system (5GS) can act as a user plane node of an external network (e.g. IEEE TSN bridge) or a 5GS can be independently used to enable TSC. For these purposes, information available at a UE is provided to the network and port management information containers are exchanged between a DS-TT and a TSN AF or a TSCTSF (see 3GPPTS24.539[19BA]).

During a UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure, if the UE supports transfer of port management information containers, then the UE indicates that transfer of port management information container is supported and the UE provides a DS-TT Ethernet port MAC address (if the PDU session type is Ethernet), port management information container, and a UE-DS-TT residence time (if available) to the network (see subclause6.4.1.2).

Once the UE has successfully established a PDU session and the UE has indicated that transfer of port management information container is supported during the UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure (see subclause6.4.1.2), then port management information containers are exchanged via a UE-requested PDU session modification procedure and a network-requested PDU session modification procedure (see subclauses6.3.2 and6.4.2). The UE receiving a port management information container from the network shall forward the port management information container to the DS-TT. The SMF receiving a port management information container from the UE shall operate as described in 3GPPTS23.502[9].

4.16 UE radio capability signalling optimisation

UE radio capability signalling optimisation (RACS) is a feature that is optional at both the UE and the network and which aims to optimise the transmission of UE radio capability over the radio interface (see 3GPPTS23.501[8]). RACS works by assigning an identifier to represent a set of UE radio capabilities. This identifier is called the UE radio capability ID. A UE radio capability ID can be either manufacturer-assigned or network-assigned. The UE radio capability ID is an alternative to the signalling of the radio capabilities container over the radio interface.

In this release of the specification, RACS is applicable to neither NB-N1 mode nor non-3GPP access.

If the UE supports RACS:

a) the UE shall indicate support for RACS by setting the RACS bit to "RACS supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message;

b) if the UE performs a registration procedure for initial registration and the UE has an applicable UE radio capability ID for the current UE radio configuration in the selected network, the UE shall include the UE radio capability ID in the UE radio capability ID IE as a non-cleartext IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message. If both a network-assigned UE radio capability ID and a manufacturer-assigned UE Radio Capability ID are applicable, the UE shall include the network-assigned UE radio capability ID in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message;

c) if the radio configuration at the UE changes (for instance because the UE has disabled a specific radio capability) then:

1) if the UE has an applicable UE radio capability ID for the new UE radio configuration, the UE shall initiate a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update. The UE shall include the applicable UE radio capability ID in the UE radio capability ID IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and shall include the 5GS update type IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message with the NG-RAN-RCU bit set to "UE radio capability update needed". If both a network-assigned UE radio capability ID and a manufacturer-assigned UE Radio Capability ID are applicable, the UE shall include the network-assigned UE radio capability ID in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message; and

2) if the UE does not have an applicable UE radio capability ID for the new UE radio configuration, the UE shall initiate a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update and include the 5GS update type IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message with the NG-RAN-RCU bit set to "UE radio capability update needed";

NOTE: Performing the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update and including the 5GS update type IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message with the NG-RAN-RCU bit set to "UE radio capability update needed" without a UE radio capability ID included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message can trigger the network to assign a new UE radio capability ID to the UE.

d) upon receiving a network-assigned UE radio capability ID in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message or the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message, the UE shall store the network-assigned UE radio capability ID and the PLMN ID or SNPN identity of the serving network and, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription along with a mapping to the current UE radio configuration in its non-volatile memory as specified in annexC. The UE shall be able to store at least the last 16 received network-assigned UE radio capability IDs with the associated PLMN ID or SNPN identity and, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription and the mapping to the corresponding UE radio configuration;

e) the UE shall not use a network-assigned UE radio capability ID assigned by a PLMN in PLMNs equivalent to the PLMN which assigned it;

f) upon receiving a UE radio capability ID deletion indication IE set to "Network-assigned UE radio capability IDs deletion requested" in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message or the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message, the UE shall delete all network-assigned UE radio capability IDs stored at the UE for the serving network, initiate a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update and include an applicable manufacturer-assigned UE radio capability ID for the current UE radio configuration, if available at the UE, in the UE radio capability ID IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message; and

g) if the UE performs a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update due to entering a tracking area that is not in the list of tracking areas that the UE previously registered in the AMF and the UE has an applicable UE radio capability ID for the current UE radio configuration in the selected network, the UE shall include the UE radio capability ID in the UE radio capability ID IE as a non-cleartext IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message. If both a network-assigned UE radio capability ID and a manufacturer-assigned UE Radio Capability ID are applicable, the UE shall include the network-assigned UE radio capability ID in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If the network supports RACS:

a) the network may assign a network-assigned UE radio capability ID to a UE which supports RACS by including a UE radio capability ID IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message or in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message;

b) the network may trigger the UE to delete all network-assigned UE radio capability IDs stored at the UE for the serving network by including a UE radio capability ID deletion indication IE set to "Network-assigned UE radio capability IDs deletion requested" in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message or in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message; and

c) the network may send an IDENTITY REQUEST message to the UE that supports RACS to retrieve the PEI, if not available in the network.

4.17 5GS mobility management in NB-N1 mode

A UE in NB-N1 mode (see 3GPPTS36.331[25A]) shall calculate the value of the applicable NAS timer indicated in table10.2.1 plus 240s.

The timer value obtained is used as described in the appropriate procedure subclause of this specification. The NAS timer value shall be calculated at start of a NAS procedure and shall not re-calculate the use of the NAS timer value until the NAS procedure is completed, restarted or aborted.

When an AMF that supports NB-N1 mode performs NAS signalling with a UE, which is using NB-N1 mode, the AMF shall calculate the value of the applicable NAS timer indicated in table10.2.2 plus 240s.

The timer value obtained is used as described in the appropriate procedure subclause of this specification. The NAS timer value shall be calculated at start of a NAS procedure and shall not re-calculate the use of the NAS timer value until the NAS procedure is completed, restarted or aborted.

4.18 5GS session management in NB-N1 mode

A UE in NB-N1 mode (see 3GPPTS36.331[25A]) shall calculate the value of the applicable NAS timer indicated in table10.3.1 plus 180s.

The timer value obtained is used as described in the appropriate procedure subclause of this specification. The NAS timer value shall be calculated at start of a NAS procedure and shall not re-calculate the use of the NAS timer value until the NAS procedure is completed, restarted or aborted.

When an SMF that supports NB-N1 mode performs NAS signalling with a UE, which is using NB-N1 mode, the SMF shall calculate the value of the applicable NAS timer indicated in table10.3.2 plus 180s.

The timer value obtained is used as described in the appropriate procedure subclause of this specification. The NAS timer value shall be calculated at start of a NAS procedure and shall not re-calculate the use of the NAS timer value until the NAS procedure is completed, restarted or aborted.

4.19 5GS mobility management in WB-N1 mode for IoT

In WB-N1 mode, a UE operating in category CE can operate in either CE mode A or CE mode B (see 3GPPTS36.306[25D]). If a UE that supports CE mode B and operates in WB-N1 mode, the UE's usage setting is not set to "voice centric" (see 3GPPTS23.501[8]), and:

a) the use of enhanced coverage is not restricted by the network; or

b) CE mode B is not restricted by the network (see 3GPPTS23.501[8]);

the UE shall apply the value of the applicable NAS timer indicated in table10.2.1 for WB-N1/CE mode.

A UE that supports CE mode B and operates in WB-N1 mode shall not apply the value of the applicable NAS timer indicated in table10.2.1 for WB-N1/CE mode before receiving an indication from the network that the use of enhanced coverage is not restricted, or CE mode B is not restricted, as described in this subclause.

The NAS timer value obtained is used as described in the appropriate procedure subclause of this specification. The NAS timer value shall be calculated at start of a NAS procedure, and shall not be re-calculated until the NAS procedure is completed, restarted or aborted.

The support of CE mode B by a UE is indicated to the AMF by lower layers and shall be stored by the AMF. When an AMF that supports WB-N1 mode performs NAS signalling with a UE, which supports CE mode B and operates in WB-N1 mode, the UE's usage setting is not set to "voice centric" (see 3GPPTS23.501[8]) and the AMF determines that:

a) the use of enhanced coverage is not restricted for the UE; or

b) CE mode B is not restricted for the UE (see 3GPPTS23.501[8]);

the AMF shall calculate the value of the applicable NAS timer indicated in table10.2.2 for WB-N1/CE mode.

The NAS timer value obtained is used as described in the appropriate procedure subclause of this specification. The NAS timer value shall be calculated at start of a NAS procedure and shall not be re-calculated until the NAS procedure is completed, restarted or aborted.

4.20 5GS session management in WB-N1 mode for IoT

In WB-N1 mode, a UE operating in category CE can operate in either CE mode A or CE mode B (see 3GPPTS36.306[25D]). If a UE that supports CE mode B and operates in WB-N1 mode and the UE's usage setting is not set to "voice centric" (see 3GPPTS23.501[8]), and:

a) the use of enhanced coverage is not restricted by the network; or

b) CE mode B is not restricted by the network (see 3GPPTS23.501[8]);

the UE shall apply the value of the applicable NAS timer indicated in table10.3.1 for WB-N1/CE mode.

A UE that supports CE mode B and operates in WB-N1 mode shall not apply the value of the applicable NAS timer indicated in table10.3.1 for WB-N1/CE mode before receiving an indication from the network that the use of enhanced coverage is not restricted, or CE mode B is not restricted, as described in this subclause.

The NAS timer value obtained is used as described in the appropriate procedure subclause of this specification. The NAS timer value shall be calculated at start of a NAS procedure, and shall not be re-calculated until the NAS procedure is completed, restarted or aborted.

If the use of extended NAS timer is indicated by the AMF (see 3GPPTS23.501[8] and 3GPPTS23.502[9]), the SMF shall calculate the value of the applicable NAS timer indicated in table10.3.2 for WB-N1/CE mode.

The NAS timer value obtained is used as described in the appropriate procedure subclause of this specification. The NAS timer value shall be calculated at start of a NAS procedure and shall not be re-calculated until the NAS procedure is completed, restarted or aborted.

4.21 Authentication and Key Management for Applications (AKMA)

The UE may support AKMA.

The purpose of AKMA is to provide authentication and key management to applications based on 3GPP credentials used for 5GS access as specified in 3GPPTS33.535[24A], which allows the UE to securely exchange data with an AKMA application function.

Upon receiving a request from the upper layers to obtain AKMA Anchor Key (KAKMA) and AKMA Key Identifier (A-KID), the UE supporting AKMA shall derive the KAKMA and the AKMA Temporary Identifier (A-TID) from the valid KAUSF if available as specified in 3GPPTS33.535[24A], shall further derive the A-KID from the A-TID as specified in 3GPPTS33.535[24A] and shall provide KAKMA and A-KID to the upper layers.

The UE supporting AKMA shall notify the upper layers whenever there is a change of the KAUSF upon reception of an EAP-success message in subclauses5.4.1.2.2.8, 5.4.1.2.3.1 and 5.4.1.2.3A.1 or upon reception of SECURITY MODE COMMAND message in subclauses5.4.2.3.

During an ongoing primary authentication and key agreement procedure (see subclause5.4.1), if the UE receives a request from upper layers to obtain KAKMA and A-KID, the UE shall derive the KAKMA and A-TID after the completion of the ongoing primary authentication and key agreement procedure, shall further derive the A-KID from the A-TID as specified in 3GPPTS33.535[24A] and shall provide KAKMA and A-KID to the upper layers.

NOTE1: The upper layers derive the AKMA Application Key (KAF) from KAKMA as specified in 3GPPTS33.535[24A].

NOTE2: The knowledge of whether a certain application needs to use AKMA or not is application specific and is out of the scope of 3GPP.

NOTE3: The exact method of securing the data exchange at the upper layers using KAF is application specific and is out of the scope of 3GPP.

NOTE4: The upper layers request the UE NAS layer to provide KAKMA and A-KID before the upper layers initiate communication with an AKMA application function.

NOTE5: Upon receiving a request from the upper layers to obtain KAKMA and A-KID, if there is no KAUSF available, the UE NAS layer cannot derive the KAKMA and A-KID and provides an indication to the upper layers that KAKMA and A-KID cannot be generated.

4.22 Uncrewed aerial vehicle identification, authentication, and authorization

4.22.1 General

A 5GS can support UAV identification, authentication, and authorization (see 3GPPTS23.256[6AB]). This subclause describes NAS-specific aspects of the 5GS features to support UAV identification, authentication, authorization and C2 communication authorization.

Before accessing 5GS for UAS services, the UE supporting UAS services must have an assigned CAA-levelUAVID. The UE can be registered to 5GS for UAS services if there is a valid aerial subscription in the UE's subscription.

4.22.2 Authentication and authorization of UAV

The 5GS supports the USS UAV Authorization and Authentication (UUAA) procedure for a UE supporting UAS services. Depending on operator policy or regulatory requirements, the UUAA-MM procedure can be performed by the UE and the AMF at a registration procedure as specified in subclause5.5.1.2 or the UUAA-SM procedure can be performed by the UE and the SMF at a PDU session establishment procedureas specified in subclause6.4.1.2. The UE shall support UUAA-MM and UUAA-SM, and the network shall support UUAA-SM and may optionally support UUAA-MM. The UUAA procedure needs to be performed by 5GS with USS successfully before the connectivity for UAS services is established.

During the registration procedure as described in subclause5.5.1.2, the UE supporting UAS services provides CAA-levelUAVID to the AMF, and the AMF may trigger the UUAA-MM procedure. If the UE supporting UAS services does not provide CAA-level UAV ID to the AMF and the network is configured to perform UUAA-MM at registration procedure, the AMF may accept the registration request and shall mark in the UE's 5GMM context that the UE is not allowed to request UAS services. If the UE wants to use the UAS services by providing the CAA-Level UAV ID later on, the UE shall perform the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update.

When a UE supporting UAS services requests to establish a PDU session as described in subclause6.4.1.2 for USS communication, the UE provides CAA-levelUAVID to the network, and the SMF may trigger the UUAA-SM procedure. If the UE does not provide CAA-level UAV ID and the SM subscription data for the UE requires the UUAA-SM, the network rejects the UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure for the UAS services.

The UE supporting UAS services shall not provide CAA-level UAV ID to the network over non-3gpp access, and the network shall not perform UUAA procedure for non-3gpp access and shall ensure that the UE is not allowed to access any aerial services in non-3GPP access.

If provided by the upper layers, the UE supporting UAS services provides to the network the USS address during the registration procedure or PDU session establishment procedure so that the network uses the information to discover the USS.

NOTE: The parameters (e.g., CAA-level UAV ID or USS address) sent by a UE supporting UAS services to the network for UAS services are included in the Service-level-AA container IE which is a non-cleartext IE.

After successful UUAA procedure, either the AMF or the SMF may initiate re-authentication of the UAV when required by the USS. If UUAA-MM fails during a re-authentication and there are PDU sessions established using UAS services, the AMF shall request the SMF to perform the release of these PDU sessions and may trigger a network-initiated de-registration procedure based on operator policy. If UUAA-SM fails during a re-authentication, the SMF shall release the PDU session related to re-authentication.

If the UUAA is revoked, the PDU session related to the UAS services shall be released by the SMF. Based on operator policy, the AMF may decide to keep the UE registered or trigger a de-registration procedure.

4.22.3 Authorization of C2 communication

The 5GS supports USS authorization of C2 communication for pairing of UAV and UAV-C. The pairing of UAV and UAV-C needs to be authorized by USS successfully before the user plane connectivity for C2 communication is enabled. For C2 authorization procedure, the UE supporting UAS services provides to the network with CAA-level UAV ID and if provided by upper layers, an application layer payload containing information for UAV-C pairing and information for UAV flight authorization.

If a UE supporting UAS services uses a common PDU session for both USS communication and C2 communication, the C2 comunication can be authorized using UUAA-SM procedure during the PDU session establishment procedure or during the PDU session modification procedure. If the pairing of UAV and UAV-C is revoked, the network shall disable C2 communication for the PDU session.

NOTE: The network can disable C2 communication for the PDU session e.g., by removing the QoS flow for C2 communication during PDU session modification procedure as decribed in subclauses 6.3.2.2.

If a UE supporting UAS services uses separate PDU sessions for, respectively, USS communication and C2 communication, the C2 communication is authorized using UUAA-SM during the PDU session establishment procedure. If the pairing of UAV and UAV-C is revoked, the PDU session for C2 communication shall be released by the SMF.

4.22.4 Authorization of UAV flight

The 5GS supports USS authorization of UAV flight.

4.23 NAS over Non-Terrestrial Network

4.23.1 General

A 5GS can support 3GPP satellite NG-RAN access technology (see 3GPPTS23.501[8]). This clause describes NAS-specific aspects of the 5GS features to support 3GPP satellite NG-RAN access technology.

4.23.2 List of "PLMNs not allowed to operate at the present UE location"

For 3GPP satellite NG-RAN the UE shall store a list of "PLMNs not allowed to operate at the present UE location". Each entry consists of:

a) the PLMN identity of the PLMN which sent a message including 5GMM cause value #78 "PLMN not allowed to operate at the present UE location" via satellite NG-RAN access technology; and

b) the geographical location, if known by the UE, where 5GMM cause value #78 was received on satellite NG-RAN access technology; and

c) if the geographical location exists, a UE implementation specific distance value.

Before storing a new entry in the list, the UE shall delete any existing entry with the same PLMN identity. Upon storing a new entry, the UE starts a timer instance associated with the entry with an implementation specific value that shall not be set to a value smaller than the timer value indicated by the network in the Lower bound timer value IE, if any. If the Lower bound timer value IE was not provided by the network, the value of the timer shall be set based on the UE implementation.

The UE is allowed to attempt to access a PLMN via satellite NG-RAN access technology which is part of the list of "PLMNs not allowed to operate at the present UE location" only if:

a) the current UE location is known, a geographical location is stored for the entry of this PLMN, and the distance to the current UE location is larger than a UE implementation specific value.

b) the timer associated with the entry of this PLMN has expired; or 

c) the access is for emergency services (see 3GPPTS23.122[5] for further details).

NOTE: When the UE is accessing network for emergency services, it is up to operator and regulatory policies whether the network needs to determine if the UE is in a location where network is not allowed to operate.

The list shall accommodate three or more entries. The maximum number of entries is an implementation decision. When the list is full and a new entry has to be inserted, the oldest entry shall be deleted.

Each entry shall be removed if for the entry:

a) the UE successfully registers via satellite NG-RAN access technology to the PLMN stored in the entry; or

b) the timer instance associated with the entry expires.

The UE may delete the entry in the list, if the current UE location is known, a geographical location is stored for the entry of this PLMN, and the distance to the current UE location is larger than a UE implementation specific value. 

When the UE is switched off, the UE shall keep the list of "PLMNs not allowed to operate at the present UE location" in its non-volatile memory. The UE shall delete the list of "PLMNs not allowed to operate at the present UE location" if the USIM is removed.

4.23.3 5GS mobility management via a satellite NG-RAN cell

For 5GS mobility management via a satellite NG-RAN cell the UE shall apply the value of the applicable NAS timer indicated in table10.2.1 for access via a satellite NG-RAN cell.

Editors note: It is FFS whether the used NR satellite RAT type can be made available to NAS and whether NAS timers are not extended at use of LEO Satellite access type.

The NAS timer value obtained is used as described in the appropriate procedure subclause of this specification. The NAS timer value shall be calculated at start of a NAS procedure, and shall not be re-calculated until the NAS procedure is completed, restarted or aborted.

The access via a satellite NG-RAN cell by a UE is indicated to the AMF by lower layers and shall be stored by the AMF. When an AMF that supports access via satellite NG-RAN cells performs NAS signalling with a UE via satellite NG-RAN cells, the AMF shall calculate the value of the applicable NAS timer indicated in table10.2.2 for access via a satellite NG-RAN cell.

The NAS timer value obtained is used as described in the appropriate procedure subclause of this specification. The NAS timer value shall be calculated at start of a NAS procedure and shall not be re-calculated until the NAS procedure is completed, restarted or aborted.

4.23.4 5GS session management via a satellite NG-RAN cell

For 5GS session management via a satellite NG-RAN cell the UE shall apply the value of the applicable NAS timer indicated in table10.2.1 for access via a satellite NG-RAN cell.

Editors note: It is FFS whether the used NR satellite RAT type can be made available to NAS and whether NAS timers are not extended at use of LEO Satellite access type.

The NAS timer value obtained is used as described in the appropriate procedure subclause of this specification. The NAS timer value shall be calculated at start of a NAS procedure, and shall not be re-calculated until the NAS procedure is completed, restarted or aborted.

If the use of extended NAS timer for access via a satellite NG-RAN cell is indicated by the AMF (see 3GPPTS23.501[8] and 3GPPTS23.502[9]), the SMF shall calculate the value of the applicable NAS timer indicated in table10.3.2 for access via a satellite NG-RAN cell.

The NAS timer value obtained is used as described in the appropriate procedure subclause of this specification. The NAS timer value shall be calculated at start of a NAS procedure and shall not be re-calculated until the NAS procedure is completed, restarted or aborted.

4.23.5 Handling multiple tracking area codes from the lower layers

When a UE camps on a satellite NG-RAN cell, the UE may receive multiple TACs from the lower layers. The UE shall construct TAIs from the multiple TACs (i.e. concatenate the identity of the current PLMN and each of the TACs) and select a TAI as follows:

a) if at least one TAI belongs to the current registration area of the UE, the UE shall select a TAI which belongs to the current registration area of the UE according to the followings.

 If there are multiple TAIs which belong to the current registration area of the UE, the UE shall select a TAI as follows:

1) if there is a TAI which belongs to the list of "allowed tracking area" (if any) and does not belong to the list of "non-allowed tracking areas" (if any), the UE shall select a TAI which belongs to the list of "allowed tracking area" (if any) and does not belong to the list of "non-allowed tracking areas" (if any). In this case, if there are multiple TAIs which belong to the list of "allowed tracking area" (if any) and does not belong to the list of "non-allowed tracking areas" (if any), then the UE shall consider each of these TAIs equal and select a TAI in an implementation-specific way (e.g. taking into account LADN service area information).

2) if there is no TAI which belongs to the list of "allowed tracking area" (if any) and does not belong to the list of "non-allowed tracking areas" (if any) or neither the list of "allowed tracking area" nor the list of "non-allowed tracking areas" is available, then the UE shall consider each of these TAIs equal and select a TAI in an implementation-specific way (e.g. taking into account LADN service area information).

b) if no TAI belongs to the current registration area of the UE and:

1) there is a TAI which belongs to neither the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" nor the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service", the UE shall select a TAI which belongs to neither the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" nor the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service". In this case, if there are multiple TAIs which belong to neither the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" nor the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service", then the UE shall select a TAI according to a)-1) and a)-2) above.

2) all TAIs belong to the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" or the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service", then the UE shall consider each of these TAIs equal and select a TAI in an implementation-specific way.

The UE shall consider the selected TAI as the current TAI. The UE shall select a TAI when:

a) the UE receives multiple TACs from the lower layers; or

b) the UE has received multiple TACs from the lower layers upon starting to camping on the current cell and the registration area, the list of "allowed tracking areas", the list of "non-allowed tracking areas", the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming", or the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service" is updated.

Handling of the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" and the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service" is specified in clause5.3.13.

4.24 Minimization of service interruption

The UE and the network may support Minimization of service interruption (MINT). MINT aims to enable a UE to obtain service from a PLMN offering disaster roaming service when a disaster condition applies to the UE's determined PLMN with disaster condition.

If the UE supports MINT, the indication of whether disaster roaming is enabled in the UE, the indication of 'applicability of "lists of PLMN(s) to be used in disaster condition" provided by a VPLMN', the one or more "list of PLMN(s) to be used in disaster condition", disaster roaming wait range and disaster return wait range provisioned by the network, if available, are stored in the non-volatile memory in the ME as specified in annexC and are kept when the UE enters 5GMM-DEREGISTERED state. AnnexC specifies condition under which the indication of whether disaster roaming is enabled in the UE, the indication of 'applicability of "lists of PLMN(s) to be used in disaster condition" provided by a VPLMN', the one or more "lists of PLMN(s) to be used in disaster condition", disaster roaming wait range and disaster return wait range stored in the ME are deleted.

Upon selecting a PLMN for disaster roaming as specified in 3GPPTS23.122[6]:

a) if the UE does not have a stored disaster roaming wait range, the UE shall perform a registration procedure for disaster roaming services on the selected PLMN as described in clause5.5.1; and

b) if the UE has a stored disaster roaming wait range, the UE shall generate a random number within the disaster roaming wait range and start a timer with the generated random number. While the timer is running, the UE shall not initiate registration on the selected PLMN except if the UE needs to request an emergency PDU session, in which case the UE shall initiate the registration procedure, set the 5GS registration type IE to "emergency registration" in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and keep the timer running. Upon expiration of the timer, if the UE does not have an emergency PDU session, the UE shall perform a registration procedure for disaster roaming services as described in clause5.5.1 if still camped on the selected PLMN. If the UE has an emergency PDU session when the timer expires, the registration procedure for disaster roaming services as described in clause5.5.1 shall be performed after the release of the emergency PDU session, if the UE is still camped on the selected PLMN.

The timer started with a generated random number within the disaster roaming wait range is stopped and the UE shall perform a PLMN selection as described in 3GPPTS23.122[5], if:

a) the UE has successfully registered over non-3GPP access on another PLMN; 

b) the UE has successfully registered with an allowable PLMN; or

c) an NG-RAN cell selected for camping of the selected PLMN broadcasts neither the disaster related indication nor a "list of one or more PLMN(s) with disaster condition for which disaster roaming is offered by the available PLMN" including the determined PLMN with Disaster Condition (see 3GPPTS23.122[5]).

Upon determining that a disaster condition has ended and that the UE shall perform PLMN selection as specified in 3GPPTS23.122[6]:

a) if the UE does not have a stored disaster return wait range, the UE shall perform a registration procedure on the selected PLMN; and

b) if the UE has a stored disaster return wait range, the UE shall generate a random number within the disaster return wait range and start a timer with the generated random number value. While the timer is running, the UE shall not initiate registration on the selected PLMN. Upon expiration of the timer, the UE shall perform a registration procedure if still camped on the selected PLMN.

When the AMF assigns a registration area to the UE registered for disaster roaming services, the AMF shall only include TAIs covering the area with the disaster condition.

When the AMF determines that the disaster condition has ended and the UE which is registered for disaster roaming services has an emergency PDU session, the AMF shall initiate the generic UE configuration update procedure to indicate that the UE is registered for emergency services as described in subclause5.4.4.2.

Interworking with EPS is not supported for UEs that are registered for disaster roaming services. When registering for disaster roaming services, the UE indicates to the network that S1 mode is not supported as described in subclause5.5.1.2.2. While registered for disaster roaming service and upon a need to establish an emergency PDU session or perform emergency services fallback, the UE initiates the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update and indicates that S1 mode is supported as described in subclause5.5.1.3.2.

4.25 Support of MUSIM features

A network and a MUSIM UE may support one or more of the MUSIM features (i.e. the N1 NAS signalling connection release, the paging indication for voice services, the reject paging request, the paging restriction and the paging timing collision control).

If MUSIM UE supports one or more MUSIM features, the UE indicates support of one or more MUSIM features (except for the paging timing collision control) during the registration procedure. If the UE has indicated support of the N1 NAS signalling connection release or the reject paging request or both and the UE supports the paging restriction, the UE indicates support of the paging restriction.

If the UE indicates support of one or more MUSIM features and the network decides to accept one or more MUSIM features, the network indicates the support of one or more MUSIM features during the registration procedure. The network only indicates the support of the paging restriction together with the support of either N1 NAS signalling connection release or the reject paging request.

The network does not indicate support for any MUSIM feature to the UE during the registration for emergency services.

If a UE stops fulfilling the condition to be considered a MUSIM UE as defined in subclause3.1, and the UE has negotiated support of one or more MUSIM features, then the UE shall initiate a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update to indicate that all the MUSIM features are not supported (except for the paging timing collision control) as specified in subclause5.5.1.3.

A MUSIM UE operating in NB-N1 mode or in WB-N1 mode CE mode B does not indicate the support for paging indication for voice services during the registration procedure towards the network.

5 Elementary procedures for 5GS mobility management

5.1 Overview

5.1.1 General

The main function of the 5GS mobility management (5GMM) sublayer is to support the identification, security, mobility of a UE as well as generic message transport.

A further function of the 5GMM sublayer is to provide connection management services to the other sublayer(s).

NOTE: In a satellite NG-RAN access, a GNSS fix time in lower layers can delay transmission of an initial UL NAS message by up to 100 seconds (GNSS cold state).

5.1.2 Types of 5GMM procedures

Depending on how they can be initiated, three types of 5GMM procedures can be distinguished:

a) 5GMM common procedures:

 5GMM common procedure can always be initiated when the UE is in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode. The procedures belonging to this type are:

1) Initiated by the network:

i) network-initiated NAS transport;

ii) primary authentication and key agreement;

iii) security mode control;

iv) generic UE configuration update;

v) identification; and

vi) network slice-specific authentication and authorization;

2) Initiated by the UE:

 UE-initiated NAS transport.

3) Initiated by the UE or the network and used to report certain error conditions detected upon receipt of 5GMM protocol data:

 5GMM status.

b) 5GMM specific procedures:

 At any time only one UE initiated 5GMM specific procedure can be running for each of the access network(s) that the UE is camping in. The procedures belonging to this type are:

1) Initiated by the UE and used e.g. to register to the network for 5GS services and establish a 5GMM context, to update the location/parameter(s) of the UE:

 registration.

2) Initiated by the UE or the network and used to deregister from the network for 5GS services and to release a 5GMM context:

 de-registration.

3) Initiated by the UE and used to deregister from the network for 5GS services and to release a 5GMM context:

 eCall inactivity procedure.

c) 5GMM connection management procedures:

1) Initiated by the UE and used to establish a secure connection to the network or to request the resource reservation for sending data, or both:

 service request.

 The service request procedure can only be initiated if no UE initiated 5GMM specific procedure is ongoing for each of the access network(s) that the UE is camping in.

2) Initiated by the network and used to request the establishment of an N1 NAS signalling connection or to request re-establishment of user-plane resources for the PDU session(s) associated with 3GPP access or to request re-establishment of user-plane resources of the PDU session(s) associated with non-3GPP access over 3GPP access; not applicable for the non-3GPP access network:

 paging.

3) Initiated by the network and used to request re-establishment of user-plane resources of the PDU session(s) associated with non-3GPP access over 3GPP access or to deliver 5GSM downlink signalling messages associated with non-3GPP access over 3GPP access, when the UE is in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode over 3GPP access and in 5GMM-IDLE mode over non-3GPP access; or

 Initiated by the network and used to request re-establishment of user-plane resources of the PDU session(s) associated with 3GPP access over 3GPP access or to deliver downlink signalling associated with 3GPP access over 3GPP access, when the UE is in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode over non-3GPP access, and when the UE is in 5GMM-IDLE mode over 3GPP access and not in MICO mode:

 notification.

NOTE1: In NB-N1 mode, the UE NAS using 5GS services with control plane CIoT 5GS optimization can wait for the lower layers to complete the transmission of the previous UL NAS TRANSPORT messages carrying control plane user data before providing subsequent NAS messages. Other implementations are possible.

NOTE2: When providing NAS messages to the lower layers for transmission, the UE NAS using 5GS services with control plane CIoT 5GS optimization can prioritize sending NAS signalling messages over the UL NAS TRANSPORT messages carrying control plane user data. How the UE performs this prioritization is implementation specific.

5.1.3 5GMM sublayer states

5.1.3.1 General

In the following subclauses, the 5GS mobility management (5GMM) sublayer of the UE and the network is described by means of different state machines. The 5GMM sublayer states is managed per access type independently, i.e. 3GPP access or non-3GPP access. In subclause5.1.3.2, the states of the 5GMM sublayer are introduced.

5.1.3.2 5GMM sublayer states

5.1.3.2.1 5GMM sublayer states in the UE

5.1.3.2.1.1 General

In the following subclauses, the possible 5GMM sublayer states of the UE are described and shown in Figure5.1.3.2.1.1.1.



NOTE: Not all possible transitions are shown in this figure.

Figure5.1.3.2.1.1.1: 5GMM main states in the UE

5.1.3.2.1.2 Main states

5.1.3.2.1.2.1 5GMM-NULL

5GS services are disabled in the UE. No 5GS mobility management function shall be performed in this state.

5.1.3.2.1.2.2 5GMM-DEREGISTERED

In the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED, no 5GMM context has been established and the UE location is unknown to the network and hence it is unreachable by a network. In order to establish a 5GMM context, the UE shall start the initial registration procedure.

5.1.3.2.1.2.3 5GMM-REGISTERED-INITIATED

A UE enters the state 5GMM-REGISTERED-INITIATED after it has started the initial registration procedure or the non-initial registration procedure, and is waiting for a response from the network.

5.1.3.2.1.2.4 5GMM-REGISTERED

In the state 5GMM-REGISTERED, a 5GMM context has been established. Additionally, one or more PDU session(s) may be established at the UE. The UE may initiate the non-initial registration procedure (including the normal registration update and periodic registration update) and the service request procedure. The UE in the state 5GMM-REGISTERED over non-3GPP access shall not initiate the periodic registration update procedure.

5.1.3.2.1.2.5 5GMM-DEREGISTERED-INITIATED

A UE enters the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED-INITIATED after it has requested release of the 5GMM context by starting the de-registration procedure and is waiting for a response from the network.

5.1.3.2.1.2.6 5GMM-SERVICE-REQUEST-INITIATED

A UE enters the state 5GMM-SERVICE-REQUEST-INITIATED after it has started the service request procedure and is waiting for a response from the network.

5.1.3.2.1.3 Substates of state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED

5.1.3.2.1.3.1 General

The state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED is subdivided into a number of substates as described in this subclause. The following substates are not applicable to non-3GPP access:

a) 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH:

b) 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.NO-CELL-AVAILABLE; and

c) 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.eCALL-INACTIVE.

Valid subscriber data are available for the UE before it enters the substates, except for the substate 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.NO-SUPI.

5.1.3.2.1.3.2 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE

The substate 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE is chosen in the UE when a suitable cell has been found and the PLMN, SNPN, or tracking area is not in the forbidden list.

5.1.3.2.1.3.3 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE

The substate 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE is chosen in the UE, when it is known that a selected cell for 3GPP access or TA for non-3GPP access is unable to provide normal service (e.g. the selected cell over 3GPP access is in a forbidden PLMN or SNPN or is in a forbidden tracking area or TA for non-3GPP access is forbidden) or the selected cell is a CAG cell whose CAG ID is not included in the "Allowed CAG list" in the entry of the "CAG information list" for the PLMN, or the selected cell is a non-CAG cell in a PLMN for which there exists an "indication that the UE is only allowed to access 5GS via CAG cells" in the entry of the "CAG information list" for the PLMN.

5.1.3.2.1.3.4 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-REGISTRATION

The substate 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-REGISTRATION is chosen in the UE if the initial registration procedure failed due to a missing response from the network or due to the circumstances described in subclauses5.5.1.2.4, 5.5.1.2.5, 5.5.1.2.7 and 5.5.1.3.4.

5.1.3.2.1.3.5 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH

The substate 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH is chosen in the UE, if the UE is searching for PLMNs or SNPNs. This substate is left either when a cell has been selected (the new substate is NORMAL-SERVICE or LIMITED-SERVICE) or when it has been concluded that no cell is available at the moment (the new substate is NO-CELL-AVAILABLE).

This substate is not applicable to non-3GPP access.

5.1.3.2.1.3.6 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.NO-SUPI

The substate 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.NO-SUPI is chosen in the UE, if the N1 mode is enabled and the UE has no valid subscriber data available (USIM not available, the USIM is considered invalid by the UE or an entry of the "list of subscriber data" with the SNPN identity of the SNPN is considered invalid by the UE).

5.1.3.2.1.3.7 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.NO-CELL-AVAILABLE

No 5G cell can be selected. This substate is entered after a first intensive search failed when in substate 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH. Cells are searched for at a low rhythm. No 5GS services are offered.

This substate is not applicable to non-3GPP access.

5.1.3.2.1.3.8 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.eCALL-INACTIVE

The substate 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.eCALL-INACTIVE is chosen in the UE when:

a) the UE is configured for eCall only mode as specified in 3GPPTS31.102[22];

b) timer T3444 and timer T3445 have expired or are not running;

c) a PLMN has been selected as specified in 3GPPTS23.122[5];

d) the UE does not need to perform an eCall over IMS; and

e) the UE does not need to perform a call to a non-emergency MSISDN or URI for test or terminal reconfiguration service.

In this substate, the UE shall not initiate any signalling towards the network, except to originate an eCall over IMS, or a call to a non-emergency MSISDN or URI for test or terminal reconfiguration service.

This substate is not applicable to non-3GPP access.

5.1.3.2.1.3.9 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.INITIAL-REGISTRATION-NEEDED

Valid subscriber data are available for the UE and for some reason a registration procedure for initial registration has to be performed as soon as possible. This substate can be entered if the access is barred due to unified access control, (see subclause4.5.4) or if the network rejects the N1 NAS signalling connection establishment.

5.1.3.2.1.4 Substates of state 5GMM-REGISTERED

5.1.3.2.1.4.1 General

The state 5GMM-REGISTERED is subdivided into a number of substates as described in this subclause. The following substates are not applicable to non-3GPP access:

a) 5GMM-REGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH:

b) 5GMM-REGISTERED.NON-ALLOWED-SERVICE; and

c) 5GMM-REGISTERED.NO-CELL-AVAILABLE.

5.1.3.2.1.4.2 5GMM-REGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE

The substate 5GMM-REGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE is chosen by the UE as the primary substate when the UE enters the state 5GMM-REGISTERED, and:

- for 3GPP access, the cell the UE selected is known to be in an allowed area (see subclause5.3.5.2); or

- for wireline access, the wireline access service area restrictions are not enforced.

5.1.3.2.1.4.3 5GMM-REGISTERED.NON-ALLOWED-SERVICE

The substate 5GMM-REGISTERED.NON-ALLOWED-SERVICE is chosen in the UE, if:

- for 3GPP access, the cell the UE selected is known to be in a non-allowed area (see subclause5.3.5.2); or

- for wireline access, the wireline access service area restrictions are enforced.

This substate is applicable only to 3GPP access and to wireline access.

5.1.3.2.1.4.4 5GMM-REGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-REGISTRATION-UPDATE

The substate 5GMM-REGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-REGISTRATION-UPDATE is chosen by the UE if the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update failed due to a missing response from the network, or due to the circumstances described in subclauses5.3.9, 5.5.1.3.5 and 5.5.1.3.7. No 5GMM procedure except registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update (i.e. the 5GS registration type IE set to "mobility registration updating" or "periodic registration updating" in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message) and deregistration procedure, shall be initiated by the UE in this substate. No data shall be sent or received.

NOTE1: The registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update over non-3GPP access can be triggered by, e.g. the change of S1 UE network capability or renegotiating some parameters.

NOTE2: This substate is entered irrespective whether: 

- the UE is camped on a cell which is in the registered PLMN or a PLMN from the list of equivalent PLMNs and the current TAI is not in the list of "allowed tracking areas"; or 

- the current TAI is in the list of "non-allowed tracking areas".

5.1.3.2.1.4.5 5GMM-REGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE

The substate 5GMM-REGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE is chosen in the UE, if the cell the UE selected is known not to be able to provide normal service.

5.1.3.2.1.4.6 5GMM-REGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH

The substate 5GMM-REGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH is chosen in the UE, while the UE is searching for PLMNs or SNPNs.

This substate is not applicable to non-3GPP access.

5.1.3.2.1.4.7 5GMM-REGISTERED.NO-CELL-AVAILABLE

5G coverage has been lost or MICO mode is active in the UE. If MICO mode is active, the UE can deactivate MICO mode at any time by activating the AS layer when the UE needs to send mobile originated signalling or user data. Otherwise, the UE shall not initiate any 5GMM procedure except for cell and PLMN reselection.

This substate is not applicable to non-3GPP access.

5.1.3.2.1.4.8 5GMM-REGISTERED.UPDATE-NEEDED

This state can be entered if the UE has to perform a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update but:

a) the access is barred due to unified access control when in 3GPP access;

b) the network rejects the N1 NAS signalling connection establishment when in 3GPP access or in non-3GPP access; or

c) the UE in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode with RRC inactive indication receives an indication from the lower layers that the resumption of the RRC connection has failed and for access is barred for all categories except categories '0' and '2' as specified in subclause5.3.1.4.

No 5GMM procedure except:

a) registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update;

b) service request procedure as a response to paging or notification; and

c) deregistration procedure

shall be initiated by the UE in this substate.

NOTE: This substate is entered irrespective whether:

- the UE is camped on a cell which is in the registered PLMN or a PLMN from the list of equivalent PLMNs and the current TAI is not in the list of "allowed tracking areas"; or

- the current TAI is in the list of "non-allowed tracking areas".

5.1.3.2.2 5GS update status in the UE

In order to describe the detailed UE behaviour, the 5GS update (5U) status pertaining to a specific subscriber is defined.

If the UE is not operating in SNPN access operation mode (see 3GPPTS23.501[8]), the 5GS update status is stored in a non-volatile memory in the USIM if the corresponding file is present in the USIM, else in the non-volatile memory in the ME, as described in annexC.

If the UE is operating in SNPN access operation mode, the 5GS update status for each SNPN whose SNPN identity is included in the "list of subscriber data" configured in the ME (see 3GPPTS23.122[5]) is stored in the non-volatile memory in the ME as described in annexC.

The 5GS update status value is changed only after the execution of a registration, network-initiated de-registration, 5GS based primary authentication and key agreement, service request, paging procedure or due to change in the current TAI which does not belong to the current registration area while T3346 is running.

5U1: UPDATED

 The last registration attempt was successful.

5U2: NOT UPDATED

 The last registration or service request attempt failed procedurally, e.g. no response or reject message was received from the AMF.

5U3: ROAMING NOT ALLOWED

 The last registration, service request, or registration for mobility or periodic registration update attempt was correctly performed, but the answer from the AMF was negative (because of roaming or subscription restrictions).

5.1.3.2.3 5GMM sublayer states in the network side

5.1.3.2.3.1 General

In the following subclauses, the possible 5GMM sublayer states of the network are described and shown in Figure5.1.3.2.3.1.1.



NOTE: Not all possible transitions are shown in this figure.

Figure5.1.3.2.3.1.1: 5GMM main states in the network

5.1.3.2.3.2 5GMM-DEREGISTERED

In the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED, no 5GMM context has been established or the 5GMM context is marked as deregistered. The UE is deregistered. The network may answer to an initial registration procedure initiated by the UE. The network may also answer to a de-registration procedure initiated by the UE.

5.1.3.2.3.3 5GMM-COMMON-PROCEDURE-INITIATED

The network enters the state 5GMM-COMMON-PROCEDURE-INITIATED, after it has started a common 5GMM procedure and is waiting for a response from the UE.

5.1.3.2.3.4 5GMM-REGISTERED

In the state 5GMM-REGISTERED, a 5GMM context has been established. Additionally, one or more PDU session(s) may be established at the network.

5.1.3.2.3.5 5GMM-DEREGISTERED-INITIATED

The network enters the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED-INITIATED after it has started a de-registration procedure and is waiting for a response from the UE.

5.1.4 Coordination between 5GMM and EMM

5.1.4.1 General

If both 5GMM and EMM are enabled, a UE, operating in single-registration mode, shall maintain one common registration for 5GMM for 3GPP access and EMM.

Coordination between 5GMM for 3GPP access and EMM for a UE, which is capable of N1 mode and S1 mode and operates in dual-registration mode, is not needed, except as specified in subclause4.8.3.

The coordination between 5GMM for 3GPP access and EMM in subclauses5.1.4.2 and5.1.4.3 only applies to the UEs operating in single-registration mode.

Regarding the coordination of "SIM/USIM considered invalid" and "USIM considered invalid for 5GS services" between the various mobility management entities see subclause5.1.5.

5.1.4.2 Coordination between 5GMM for 3GPP access and EMM with N26 interface

A UE that is not registered shall be in state EMM-DEREGISTERED and state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED for 3GPP access.

In N1 mode, upon successful completion of a registration procedure over 3GPP access, the UE operating in single-registration mode shall enter substates 5GMM-REGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE or 5GMM-REGISTERED.NON-ALLOWED-SERVICE as described in subclause5.3.5.2 for 3GPP access and EMM-REGISTERED.NO-CELL-AVAILABLE. The UE shall reset the registration attempt counter for 3GPP access and the attach attempt counter (see 3GPPTS24.301[15]).

At inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode, the UE shall enter substates 5GMM-REGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE or 5GMM-REGISTERED.NON-ALLOWED-SERVICE as described in subclause5.3.5.2 for 3GPP accessand EMM-REGISTERED.NO-CELL-AVAILABLE and initiate a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update over 3GPP access indicating "mobility registration updating" in the 5GS registration type IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message (see subclause5.5.1.3).

In S1 mode, upon successful completion of an attach or tracking area updating procedure, the UE operating in single-registration mode shall enter substates 5GMM-REGISTERED.NO-CELL-AVAILABLE for 3GPP access and EMM-REGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE. The UE shall reset the registration attempt counter for 3GPP access and the attach attempt counter or tracking area updating attempt counter (see 3GPPTS24.301[15]).

At inter-system change from N1 mode to S1 mode when there is no active PDU session for which interworking with EPS is supported as specified in subclause6.1.4.1, and EMM-REGISTERED without PDN connection is not supported by the UE or the MME, the UE shall enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED for 3GPP access and state EMM-DEREGISTERED and then initiate the EPS attach procedure. If EMM-REGISTERED without PDN connection is supported by the UE and the MME, the UE shall enter substates EMM-REGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE and 5GMM-REGISTERED.NO-CELL-AVAILABLE for 3GPP access and initiate a tracking area updating procedure.

At inter-system change from N1 mode to S1 mode when there is at least one active PDU session for which interworking with EPS is supported as specified in subclause6.1.4.1, the UE shall enter substates EMM-REGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE and 5GMM-REGISTERED.NO-CELL-AVAILABLE for 3GPP access and initiate a tracking area updating procedure (see 3GPPTS24.301[15]).

5.1.4.3 Coordination between 5GMM for 3GPP access and EMM without N26 interface

A UE operating in the single-registration mode that is not registered over 3GPP access shall be in state EMM-DEREGISTERED and in state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED for 3GPP access.

In N1 mode, upon successful completion of a registration procedure over 3GPP access, the UE operating in the single-registration mode shall enter substates 5GMM-REGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE or 5GMM-REGISTERED.NON-ALLOWED-SERVICE as described in subclause5.3.5.2 for 3GPP access and EMM-REGISTERED.NO-CELL-AVAILABLE.

At inter-system change from N1 mode to S1 mode in 5GMM-IDLE mode, the UE shall behave as specified in subclause4.8.2.3.

In S1 mode, upon successful completion of an attach or tracking area updating procedure, the UE operating in the single-registration mode shall enter substates 5GMM-REGISTERED.NO-CELL-AVAILABLE for 3GPP access and EMM-REGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE.

At inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode in 5GMM-IDLE mode, the UE operating in the single-registration mode shall enter substates EMM-REGISTERED.NO-CELL-AVAILABLE and 5GMM- REGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE for 3GPP access and then initiate the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update over 3GPP access indicating "mobility registration updating" in the 5GS registration type IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message (see subclause5.5.1.3).

5.1.5 Coordination between 5GMM and GMM

Coordination between 5GMM and GMM states is not required.

Regardless whether the UE is operating in single-registration mode or dual-registration mode,

a) if the UE considers the SIM/USIM invalid for any of: 3GPP access in N1 mode, S1 mode, A/Gb mode or Iu mode, then it considers the SIM/USIM invalid for all of them; and

b) if the UE considers the USIM invalid for 5GS services for any of: 3GPP access in N1 mode, S1 mode, A/Gb mode or Iu mode, then it considers the USIM invalid for 5GS services for all of them.

5.2 Behaviour of the UE in state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED and state 5GMM-REGISTERED

5.2.1 General

In this subclause, the detailed behaviour of the UE in the states 5GMM-DEREGISTERED and 5GMM-REGISTERED is described.

5.2.2 UE behaviour in state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED

5.2.2.1 General

The state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED is entered in the UE, when:

a) the de-registration is performed either by the UE or by the network (see subclause5.5.2);

b) the registration request is rejected by the AMF (see subclause5.5.1.2.5 and 5.5.1.3.5);

c) the service request is rejected by the AMF (see subclause5.6.1);

d) the UE is switched on; or

e) the UE registered for emergency services is in 5GMM-IDLE mode and its periodic registration update timer expires (see subclause5.3.7).

In state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED, the UE shall behave according to the substate as explained in subclause5.2.2.3.

5.2.2.2 Primary substate selection

5.2.2.2.1 Selection of the substate after power on

For a UE configured for eCall only mode as specified in 3GPPTS31.102[22], timers T3444 and T3445 are considered to have expired at power on. When the UE is switched on, the substate shall be PLMN-SEARCH if the USIM is available and valid or there are valid entries in the "list of subscriber data". See 3GPPTS23.122[5] for further details.

The substate chosen after PLMN-SEARCH, following power on is:

a) if no cell can be selected, the substate shall be NO-CELL-AVAILABLE;

b) if the UE is not operating in SNPN access operation mode, and no USIM is present, or the USIM is considered invalid by the UE, the substate shall be NO-SUPI;

c) if the UE is operating in SNPN access operation mode, and:

1) the selected entry in the "list of subscriber data" does not contain subscription identifier, and no USIM is present, or the USIM is considered invalid by the UE; or

2) no valid entry in the "list of subscriber data" exists;

the substate shall be NO-SUPI;

d) if a suitable cell has been found, the PLMN or SNPN identity of the cell is not in one of the forbidden PLMN lists, the "permanently forbidden SNPNs" list or the "temporarily forbidden SNPNs" list which are, if the MS supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, associated with the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription, and the tracking area is not in one of the lists of 5GS forbidden tracking areas, then the substate shall be NORMAL-SERVICE;

e) if the selected cell is known not to be able to provide normal service, then the UE shall enter the substate LIMITED-SERVICE;

f) if the UE is in manual network selection mode and no cell of the selected PLMN or SNPN has been found, the UE shall enter the substate NO-CELL-AVAILABLE; and

g) if the UE is configured for eCall only mode as specified in 3GPPTS31.102[22], the substate shall be eCALL-INACTIVE.

5.2.2.3 Detailed description of UE behaviour in state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED

5.2.2.3.1 NORMAL-SERVICE

The UE shall initiate an initial registration procedure if the timer T3346 is not running. If timer T3346 is running, the UE shall initiate an initial registration procedure on the expiry of timer T3346.

The UE may initiate an initial registration procedure for emergency services even if timer T3346 is running.

5.2.2.3.2 LIMITED-SERVICE

The UE shall initiate an initial registration procedure when entering a cell which provides normal service.

The UE may initiate initial registration for emergency services.

5.2.2.3.3 ATTEMPTING-REGISTRATION

The UE in 3GPP access:

a) shall initiate an initial registration procedure on the expiry of timers T3502, T3511 or T3346;

b) may initiate an initial registration procedure for emergency services even if timers T3502, T3511 or T3346 are running;

b1) may initiate an initial registration procedure even if timer T3346 is running, if the UE is a UE configured for high priority access in selected PLMN;

c) shall initiate an initial registration procedure when entering a new PLMN or SNPN, except

i) if timer T3346 is running and the new PLMN is equivalent to the PLMN where the UE started timer T3346;

ii) if the PLMN identity of the new cell is in the forbidden PLMN lists or the SNPN identity of the new cell is in the "permanently forbidden SNPNs" list or the "temporarily forbidden SNPNs" list which are, if the MS supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, associated with the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription; or

iii) if the current TAI is in one of the lists of 5GS forbidden tracking areas;

d) shall initiate an initial registration procedure when the current TAI has changed, if timer T3346 is not running, the PLMN identity of the new cell is not in one of the forbidden PLMN lists or the SNPN identity of the new cell is in neither the "permanently forbidden SNPNs" list nor the "temporarily forbidden SNPNs" list which are, if the MS supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, associated with the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription, and the current TAI is not in one of the lists of 5GS forbidden tracking areas;

e) shall initiate an initial registration procedure if the 5GS update status is set to 5U2 NOT UPDATED, and timers T3511, T3502 and T3346 are not running;

f) may initiate an initial registration procedure for UE in NB-N1 mode upon receiving a request from upper layers to transmit user data related to an exceptional event and the UE is allowed to use exception data reporting (see the ExceptionDataReportingAllowed leaf of the NAS configuration MO in 3GPPTS24.368[17]) if timer T3346 is not already running for "MO exception data" and even if timer T3502 or timer T3511 is running; and

g) may initiate an initial registration procedure with 5GS registration type IE set to "initial registration" for initiating of an emergency PDU session, upon request of the upper layers to establish the emergency PDU session.

The UE in non-3GPP access:

a) shall initiate an initial registration procedure on the expiry of timers T3502, T3511 or T3346;

b) may initiate an initial registration procedure for emergency services even if timers T3502, T3511 or T3346  are running;

b1) may initiate an initial registration procedure even if timer T3346 is running if the UE is a UE configured for high priority access in selected PLMN;

c) shall initiate an initial registration procedure when entering a new PLMN, except if timer T3346 is running and the new PLMN is equivalent to the PLMN where the UE started timer T3346;

d) shall initiate an initial registration procedure if the 5GS update status is set to 5U2 NOT UPDATED, and timers T3511, T3502 and T3346 are not running; and

e) may initiate an initial registration procedure with 5GS registration type IE set to "initial registration" for initiating of an emergency PDU session, upon request of the upper layers to establish the emergency PDU session.

5.2.2.3.4 PLMN-SEARCH

The UE shall perform PLMN selection or SNPN selection. If a new PLMN or SNPN is selected, the UE shall reset the registration attempt counter and initiate the registration procedure for initial registration (see subclause5.5.1.2.2).

If the selected cell in the new PLMN is known not to be able to provide normal service, the UE may initiate the registration procedure for initial registration for emergency services.

5.2.2.3.5 NO-SUPI

The UE may initiate the registration procedure for initial registration for emergency services.

5.2.2.3.6 NO-CELL-AVAILABLE

The UE shall perform cell selection and choose an appropriate substate when a cell is found.

5.2.2.3.7 eCALL-INACTIVE

The UE camps on a suitable cell or an acceptable cell in a PLMN selected as specified in 3GPPTS23.122[5] but initiates no 5GMM signalling with the network and ignores any paging requests.

The UE shall leave substate 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.eCALL-INACTIVE state only when one of the following events occur:

a) if the USIM is removed, the UE enters substate 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.NO-SUPI;

b) if coverage is lost, the UE enters substate 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH;

c) if the UE is deactivated (e.g. powered off) by the user, the UE enters state 5GMM-NULL;

d) if the UE receives a request from upper layers to establish an eCall over IMS, the UE enters state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-REGISTRATION. The UE then uses the relevant 5GMM and 5GSM procedures to establish the eCall over IMS at the earliest opportunity; or

e) if the UE receives a request from upper layers to establish a call to an HPLMN designated non-emergency MSISDN or URI for test or terminal reconfiguration service, the UE enters state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-REGISTRATION. Once the registration procedure is completed, the UE uses the relevant 5GMM and 5GSM procedures to establish the non-emergency call.

5.2.2.3.8 INITIAL-REGISTRATION-NEEDED

The UE shall initiate the initial registration procedure, if still needed, as soon as the access is allowed in the selected cell for the UE.

The UE may initiate registration procedure for emergency services.

5.2.2.4 Substate when back to state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED from another 5GMM state

When returning to state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED, the UE shall select a cell as specified in 3GPPTS38.304[28] or 3GPPTS36.304[25C].

The substate depends on the result of the cell selection procedure, the outcome of the previously performed 5GMM specific procedures, on the 5GS update status of the UE, on the tracking area data stored in the UE, on the presence of the USIM, on the UE configuration and on the reason for moving to 5GMM-DEREGISTERED:

a) If no cell has been found, the substate is NO-CELL-AVAILABLE, until a cell is found;

b) If no USIM is present or if the inserted USIM is considered invalid by the UE, the substate shall be NO-SUPI;

c) If a suitable cell has been found and the PLMN or tracking area is not in one of the forbidden lists, the substate shall be NORMAL-SERVICE;

d) If an initial registration shall be performed (e.g. network-requested re-registration), the substate shall be ATTEMPTING-REGISTRATION;

e) If a PLMN reselection or SNPN reselection (according to 3GPPTS23.122[5]) is needed, the substate shall be PLMN-SEARCH;

f) If the selected cell is known not to be able to provide normal service, the substate shall be LIMITED-SERVICE; and

g) If the UE is configured for eCall only mode as specified in 3GPPTS31.102[22], T3444 and T3445 have expired or are not running, and substate PLMN-SEARCH is not required, the substate shall be eCALL-INACTIVE.

5.2.3 UE behaviour in state 5GMM-REGISTERED

5.2.3.1 General

The state 5GMM-REGISTERED is entered at the UE, when the initial registration procedure is performed by the UE (see subclause5.5.1.2.2).

In state 5GMM-REGISTERED, the UE shall behave according to the substate as explained in subclause5.2.3.2.

5.2.3.2 Detailed description of UE behaviour in state 5GMM-REGISTERED

5.2.3.2.1 NORMAL-SERVICE

The UE:

a) shall initiate the mobility or the periodic registration update procedure (according to conditions given in subclause5.5.1.3.2), except that the periodic registration update procedure shall not be initiated over non-3GPP access;

b) shall initiate the service request procedure (according to conditions given in subclause5.6.1);

c) shall respond to paging;

d) if configured for eCall only mode as specified in 3GPPTS31.102[22], shall perform the eCall inactivity procedure at expiry of timer T3444 or timer T3445 (see subclause5.5.3); and

e) shall initiate a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update on the expiry of timer T3511.

NOTE1: Paging is not supported over non-3GPP access.

NOTE2: As an implementation option, the MUSIM UE is allowed to not respond to paging based on the information available in the paging message, e.g. voice service indication.

5.2.3.2.2 NON-ALLOWED-SERVICE

The UE shall behave as specified in subclause5.3.5.

The UE in 5GMM-REGISTERED.NON-ALLOWED-SERVICE substate, if configured for eCall only mode as specified in 3GPPTS31.102[22], shall perform the eCall inactivity procedure at expiry of timer T3444 or timer T3445 (see subclause5.5.3).

5.2.3.2.3 ATTEMPTING-REGISTRATION-UPDATE

The UE in 3GPP access:

a) shall not send any user data;

b) shall initiate a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update on the expiry of timers T3502, T3511 or T3346;

c) shall initiate a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update when entering a new PLMN, if timer T3346 is running and the new PLMN is not equivalent to the PLMN where the UE started timer T3346, the PLMN identity of the new cell is not in the forbidden PLMN lists, and the current TAI is not in one of the lists of 5GS forbidden tracking areas;

d) shall initiate a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update when the current TAI has changed, if timer T3346 is not running, the PLMN identity of the new cell is not in one of the forbidden PLMN lists or the SNPN identity of the new cell is in neither the "permanently forbidden SNPNs" list nor the "temporarily forbidden SNPNs" list which are, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, associated with the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription, and the current TAI is not in one of the lists of 5GS forbidden tracking areas;

e) may initiate a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update upon request of the upper layers to establish an emergency PDU session;

e1) may initiate a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update upon request of the upper layers to establish a PDU session, if the UE is a UE configured for high priority access in selected PLMN;

f) may perform de-registration locally and initiate a registration procedure for initial registration for emergency services even if timer T3346 is running;

g) shall initiate registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update upon reception of paging, or upon reception of NOTIFICATION message with access type indicating 3GPP access;

NOTE: As an implementation option, the MUSIM UE is allowed to not respond to paging based on the information available in the paging message, e.g. voice service indication.

h) may initiate a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update upon request for an MMTEL voice call, MMTEL video call, or an MO IMS registration related signalling from the upper layers, and none of the following conditions is met:

1) timer T3346 is running;

2) the UE has stored a list of "non-allowed tracking areas" and the current TAI is in the list of "non-allowed tracking areas"; or

3) the UE has stored a list of "allowed tracking areas", the UE is camped on a cell which is in the registered PLMN or a PLMN from the list of equivalent PLMNs, and the current TAI is not in the list of "allowed tracking areas";

i) shall initiate a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update if the 5GS update status is set to 5U2 NOT UPDATED, and timers T3511, T3502 and T3346 are not running;

j) if configured for eCall only mode as specified in 3GPPTS31.102[22], shall perform the eCall inactivity procedure at expiry of timer T3444 or timer T3445 (see subclause5.5.3);

k) may initiate a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update for UE in NB-N1 mode upon receiving a request from upper layers to transmit user data related to an exceptional event and the UE is allowed to use exception data reporting (see the ExceptionDataReportingAllowed leaf of the NAS configuration MO in 3GPPTS24.368[17]) if timer T3346 is not already running for "MO exception data" and even if timer T3502 or timer T3511 is running; and

l) shall not initiate the de-registration signalling procedure unless the current TAI is part of the TAI list.

The UE in non-3GPP access:

a) shall not send any user data;

b) shall initiate the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update on the expiry of timers T3502, T3511 or T3346;

c) may initiate a registration procedure for mobility registration update upon request of the upper layers to establish an emergency PDU session;

c1) may initiate a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update upon request of the upper layers to establish a PDU session, if the UE is a UE configured for high priority access in selected PLMN;

d) may perform de-registration locally and initiate a registration procedure for initial registration for emergency services even if timer T3346 is running;

e) may initiate a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update upon request for an MMTEL voice call, MMTEL video call, or an MO IMS registration related signalling from the upper layers, if timer T3346 is not running;

f) shall initiate a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update if the 5GS update status is set to 5U2 NOT UPDATED, and timers T3511, T3502 and T3346 are not running; and

g) shall not initiate the de-registration signalling procedure unless timer T3346 is running.

5.2.3.2.4 LIMITED-SERVICE

The UE:

a) shall perform cell selection/reselection;

b) may perform de-registration locally and initiate an initial registration for emergency services; and

c) if configured for eCall only mode as specified in 3GPPTS31.102[22], shall perform the eCall inactivity procedure at expiry of timer T3444 or timer T3445 (see subclause5.5.3).

5.2.3.2.5 PLMN-SEARCH

The UE shall perform PLMN selection or SNPN selection. If a new PLMN is selected, the UE shall reset the registration attempt counter and initiate a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update (see subclause5.5.1.3). If a new SNPN is selected, the UE shall reset the registration attempt counter, may perform de-registration locally and shall initiate a registration procedure for initial registration (see subclause5.5.1.2.2).

If the selected cell in the new PLMN is known not to be able to provide normal service, the UE may perform de-registration locally and initiate an initial registration for emergency services.

5.2.3.2.6 NO-CELL-AVAILABLE

The UE shall perform cell selection and choose an appropriate substate when a cell is found.

5.2.3.2.7 UPDATE-NEEDED

The UE:

a) shall not send any user data;

b) shall not send signalling information, unless it is a service request as a response to paging or to initiate signalling for emergency services or emergency services fallback;

c) shall perform cell selection/reselection;

d) shall enter the appropriate new substate as soon as the lower layers indicate that the barring is alleviated for the access category with which the access attempt for the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update was associated; and

e) if configured for eCall only mode as specified in 3GPPTS31.102[22], shall perform the eCall inactivity procedure at expiry of timer T3444 or T3445 (see subclause5.5.3).

5.3 General on elementary 5GMM procedures

5.3.1 5GMM modes and N1 NAS signalling connection

5.3.1.1 Establishment of the N1 NAS signalling connection

When the UE is in 5GMM-IDLE mode over 3GPP access and needs to transmit an initial NAS message, the UE shall request the lower layer to establish an RRC connection. Upon indication from the lower layers that the RRC connection has been established, the UE shall consider that the N1 NAS signalling connection over 3GPP access is established and enter 5GMM-CONNECTED mode over 3GPP access.

When the UE is in 5GMM-IDLE mode over non-3GPP access, and the UE receives an indication from the lower layers of non-3GPP access, that the access stratum connection is established between the UE and the network, the UE shall send an initial NAS message, consider the N1 NAS signalling connection is established and enter 5GMM-CONNECTED mode over non-3GPP access.

Initial NAS messages are:

a) REGISTRATION REQUEST message;

b) DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message;

c) SERVICE REQUEST message; and

d) CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST.

If the UE is capable of both N1 mode and S1 mode and lower layers provide an indication that the current E-UTRA cell is connected to both EPC and 5GCN, for the routing of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message during the initial registration procedure to the appropriate core network (EPC or 5GCN), the UE NAS provides the lower layers with the selected core network type information.

For the routing of the initial NAS message to the appropriate AMF, if the UE holds a 5G-GUTI or 4G-GUTI, the UE NAS provides the lower layers with the UE identity according to the following rules:

a) if the registration procedure for mobility and periodic update was triggered due to the last CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message containing the Configuration update indication IE with the Registration bit set to "registration requested" and including:

1) no other parameters;

2) one or both of the Allowed NSSAI IE and the Configured NSSAI IE; or

3) the Network slicing indication IE with the Network slicing subscription change indication set to "Network slicing subscription changed";

 the UE NAS shall not provide the lower layers with the 5G-S-TMSI or the registered GUAMI;

b) if the service request procedure was initiated over non-3GPP access, the UE NAS shall provide the lower layers with the registered GUAMI, but shall not provide the lower layers with the 5G-S-TMSI;

c) if the initial NAS message other than the SERVICE REQUEST or CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message was initiated over untrusted non-3GPP access, the UE NAS shall provide the lower layers with the GUAMI of the 5G-GUTI that the UE NAS has selected as specified in the subclause5.5.1.2.2 and 5.5.1.3.2, but shall not provide the lower layers with the 5G-S-TMSI;

 if the initial NAS message other than the SERVICE REQUEST or CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message was initiated over trusted non-3GPP access, the UE NAS shall provide the lower layers with the 5G-GUTI, if available, otherwise shall provide the lower layers with the SUCI;

 if the UE is the 5G-RG and the initial NAS message other than the SERVICE REQUEST or CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message was initiated over wireline access, the UE NAS shall provide the lower layers with the GUAMI of the 5G-GUTI that the UE NAS has selected as specified in the subclause5.5.1.2.2 and 5.5.1.3.2, if available, otherwise shall not provide the lower layers with any UE identity;

d) if the UE does not hold a 5G-GUTI that was previously assigned by the same PLMN with which the UE is performing the registration procedure and if:

1) the UE operating in the single-registration mode performs a registration procedure for mobility and periodic update indicating "mobility registration updating" following an inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode; or

2) the UE which was previously registered in S1 mode before entering state EMM-DEREGISTERED, performs an initial registration procedure, the UE has received the interworking without N26 interface indicator set to "interworking without N26 interface not supported" from the network, and the UE holds a 4G-GUTI;

 then the UE NAS provides the lower layers with a GUAMI part of the 5G-GUTI mapped from 4G-GUTI as specified in 3GPPTS23.003[4] with an indication that the GUAMI is mapped from EPS; or

e) otherwise:

1) if the tracking area of the current cell is in the registration area, the UE NAS shall provide the lower layers with the 5G-S-TMSI, but shall not provide the registered GUAMI to the lower layers; or

2) if the tracking area of the current cell is not in the registration area, the UE NAS shall provide the lower layers with the GUAMI of the 5G-GUTI that the UE NAS has selected as specified in the subclauses5.5.1.2.2 and 5.5.1.3.2, but shall not provide the lower layers with the 5G-S-TMSI.

For 3GPP access and untrusted non-3GPP access, if the UE does not hold a 5G-GUTI and the UE does not hold a 4G-GUTI, the UE NAS does not provide the lower layers with the 5G-S-TMSI or the registered GUAMI. For trusted non-3GPP access, if the UE does not hold a 5G-GUTI and the UE does not hold a 4G-GUTI, the UE NAS provides the lower layers with the SUCI.

The UE NAS also provides the lower layers with the identity of the selected PLMN (see 3GPPTS38.331[30]) if the UE is not operating in SNPN access operation mode. If the UE is operating in SNPN access operation mode, the UE NAS provides the lower layers with the SNPN identity of the selected SNPN. In a shared network, the UE shall choose one of the PLMN identity(ies) or SNPN identity(ies) as specified in 3GPPTS23.122[5].

The UE NAS layer may provide the lower layers with an NSSAI as specified in subclause4.6.2.3.

If the UE performs initial registration for onboarding services in SNPN or is registered for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE NAS layer shall provide the lower layers with an indication that the connection is for onboarding.

5.3.1.2 Re-establishment of the N1 NAS signalling connection

When the UE in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode over 3GPP access receives a fallback indication from lower layers, and the UE has no pending NAS procedure and no pending uplink user data for PDU session(s) with user-plane resources already established, the UE shall:

a) enter 5GMM-IDLE mode; and

b) initiate the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update and include the Uplink data status IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message indicating the PDU session(s) for which user-plane resources were active prior to receiving the fallback indication, if any (see subclause5.5.1.3 for further details).

When the UE in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode over 3GPP access receives a fallback indication from lower layers, and the UE has pending uplink user data for PDU session(s) with user-plane resources already established but no pending NAS procedure, the UE shall:

a) enter 5GMM-IDLE mode; and

b) initiate the service request procedure and include the Uplink data status IE in the SERVICE REQUEST message indicating the PDU session(s) for which user-plane resources were active prior to receiving the fallback indication (see subclause5.6.1 for further details).

When the UE in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode over 3GPP access receives a fallback indication from lower layers, and the UE has a pending registration procedure, a service request procedure, or a de-registration procedure, the UE shall:

a) enter 5GMM-IDLE mode;

b) proceed with the pending procedure; and

c) if the pending procedure is a service request or registration procedure and the SERVICE REQUEST message, the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message or the REGISTRATION REQUEST message does not include UE request type IE with Request type value set to "NAS signalling connection release", the UE shall include the Uplink data status IE in the SERVICE REQUEST message, or in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, indicating the PDU session(s) for which user-plane resources were not active prior to receiving a fallback indication from the lower layers and the UE has pending user data to be sent over 3GPP access, if any, and the PDU session(s) for which user-plane resources were active prior to receiving the fallback indication, if any (see subclauses5.5.1.3 and 5.6.1 for further details).

When the UE in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode over 3GPP access receives a fallback indication from lower layers, and the UE has a pending NAS procedure other than a registration procedure, a service request procedure, or a de-registration procedure, the UE shall:

a) enter 5GMM-IDLE mode;

b) initiate the service request procedure and include the Uplink data status IE in the SERVICE REQUEST message indicating the PDU session(s) for which user-plane resources were active prior to receiving the fallback indication, if any (see subclause5.6.1 for further details); and

c) upon successful service request procedure completion, proceed with any pending procedure.

When the UE in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode over 3GPP access receives a fallback indication from lower layers, and the UE has no pending NAS procedure and no pending uplink user data for PDU session(s) with user-plane resources already established, and the UE was using network resources for ProSe direct discovery over PC5 or ProSe direct communication over PC5 (see 3GPPTS23.304[6E]), the UE shall:

a) enter 5GMM-IDLE mode; and

b) initiate the service request procedure and include the Uplink data status IE in the SERVICE REQUEST message indicating the PDU session(s) for which user-plane resources were active prior to receiving the fallback indication, if any (see subclause5.6.1 for further details).

The cases above apply when the UE is in an allowed area or when the UE is not in a non-allowed area.

When the UE:

a) is in a non-allowed area or is not in an allowed area;

b) is in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode over 3GPP access;

c) receives a fallback indication from lower layers; and

d) does not have signalling pending,

the UE shall:

a) enter 5GMM-IDLE mode; and

b) initiate the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update. The UE shall not include the Uplink data status IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message except if the PDU session for which user-plane resources were active is an emergency PDU session, or if the UE is configured for high priority access in the selected PLMN.

In the above cases when the UE receives a fallback indication from lower layers, if the UE is in non-allowed area or not in allowed area, the UE shall behave as specified in subclause5.3.5.

5.3.1.3 Release of the N1 NAS signalling connection

The signalling procedure for the release of the N1 NAS signalling connection is initiated by the network.

In N1 mode, upon indication from lower layers that the access stratum connection has been released, the UE shall enter 5GMM-IDLE mode and consider the N1 NAS signalling connection released.

If the UE in 3GPP access is configured for eCall only mode as specified in 3GPPTS31.102[22] then:

- if the N1 NAS signalling connection that was released had been established for eCall over IMS, the UE shall start timer T3444; and

- if the N1 NAS signalling connection that was released had been established for a call to an HPLMN designated non-emergency MSISDN or URI for test or terminal reconfiguration service, the UE shall start timer T3445.

The UE shall start the timer T3447 if not already running when the N1 NAS signalling connection is released as specified in subclause5.3.17.

To allow the network to release the N1 NAS signalling connection, the UE:

a) shall start the timer T3540 if the UE receives any of the 5GMM cause values #7, #11, #12, #13, #15, #27, #31, #62, #72, #73, #74, #75, #76 and the UE does not consider the received 5GMM cause value as abnormal case as specified in subclauses5.5.1.2.7,5.5.1.3.7 and5.5.2.3.4;

b) shall start the timer T3540 for a UE in 3GPP access if:

1) the UE receives a REGISTRATION ACCEPT message which does not include a Pending NSSAI IE or UE radio capability ID deletion indication IE;

2) the UE has set the Follow-on request indicator to "No follow-on request pending" in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message;

3) the UE has not included the Uplink data status IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, or the UE has included the Uplink data status IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message but the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message indicates that no user-plane resources of any PDU sessions are to be re-established;

4) the UE has not included the Allowed PDU session status IE or has included the Allowed PDU session status IE indicating there is no PDU session(s) for which the UE allowed the user-plane resource to be re-established over 3GPP access in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, or the UE has included the Allowed PDU session status IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message but the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message does not indicate that any user-plane resources of any PDU sessions are to be re-established;

5) the registration procedure has been initiated in 5GMM-IDLE mode, or the UE has set Request type to "NAS signalling connection release" in the UE request type IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and the N1 NAS signalling connection release bit is set to "N1 NAS signalling connection release supported" in the 5GS network feature support IE of the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message;

6) the user-plane resources for PDU sessions have not been set up, except for the case the UE has set Request type to "NAS signalling connection release" in the UE request type IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and the N1 NAS signalling connection release bit is set to "N1 NAS signalling connection release supported" in the 5GS network feature support IE of the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message;

7) the UE need not request resources for V2X communication over PC5 reference point (see 3GPPTS23.287[6C]); and

8) the UE need not request resources for ProSe direct discovery over PC5 or ProSe direct communication over PC5 (see 3GPPTS23.304[6E]);

NOTE1: The lower layers indicate when the user-plane resources for PDU sessions are successfully established or released.

c) shall start the timer T3540 if the UE receives a REGISTRATION REJECT message indicating:

 the 5GMM cause value #9 or #10;

d) shall start the timer T3540 if the UE receives a SERVICE REJECT message indicating:

 the 5GMM cause value #9, #10; or 

 the 5GMM cause value #28 and with no emergency PDU session has been established;

e) shall start the timer T3540 if:

1) the UE receives a CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message containing the Configuration update indication IE with the Registration bit set to "registration requested" and with:

i) either new allowed NSSAI information or new configured NSSAI information or both included;

ii) the network slicing subscription change indication; or

iii) no other parameters;

2) the user-plane resources for PDU sessions have not been set up; and

f) shall start the timer T3540 for a UE in 3GPP access if:

1) the UE receives a SERVICE ACCEPT message;

2) for the case that the UE sent the:

i) SERVICE REQUEST message, the UE did not set the Service type IE to "signalling" or "high priority access", the UE has not included the Uplink data status IE in the SERVICE REQUEST message, or the UE has included the Uplink data status IE in the SERVICE REQUEST message but the SERVICE ACCEPT message indicates that no user-plane resources of any PDU sessions are to be re-established; or

ii) CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message, the UE did not set the Control plane service type IE to "emergency services fallback", the UE has not included the Uplink data status IE in the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message, or the UE has included the Uplink data status IE in the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message but the SERVICE ACCEPT message indicates that no user-plane resources of any PDU sessions are to be re-established;

3) the UE has not included the Allowed PDU session status IE or has included the Allowed PDU session status IE indicating there is no PDU session(s) for which the UE allowed the user-plane resource to be re-established over 3GPP access in the SERVICE REQUEST message or the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message, or the UE has included the Allowed PDU session status IE in the SERVICE REQUEST message or the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message but the SERVICE ACCEPT message does not indicate that any user-plane resources of any PDU sessions are to be re-established;

4) the service request procedure has been initiated in 5GMM-IDLE mode;

5) the user-plane resources for PDU sessions have not been set up;

6) the UE need not request resources for V2X communication over PC5 reference point (see 3GPPTS23.287[6C]); and

7) the UE need not request resources for ProSe direct discovery over PC5 or ProSe direct communication over PC5 (see 3GPPTS23.304[6E]);

NOTE2: The lower layers indicate when the user-plane resources for PDU sessions are successfully established or released.

g) may start the timer T3540 if the UE receives any of the 5GMM cause values #3 or #6 or if it receives an AUTHENTICATION REJECT message;

h) shall start the timer T3540 upon completion of the configuration update procedure or the registration procedure if the UE does not have an emergency PDU session and:

1) the UE received a CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message or a REGISTRATION ACCEPT message while camping on a CAG cell and the entry for the current PLMN in the received "CAG information list" does not include any of the CAG-ID(s) supported by the current CAG cell;

2) the UE received a CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message or a REGISTRATION ACCEPT message while camping on a non-CAG cell and the entry for the current PLMN in the received "CAG information list" includes an "indication that the UE is only allowed to access 5GS via CAG cells"; or

3) the UE received a CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message while camping on a CAG cell and the entry for the current PLMN in not included in the received "CAG information list"; or

i) shall start the timer T3540 for a UE in 3GPP access if:

1) the UE receives a SERVICE ACCEPT message; and

2) the UE:

- has set Request type to "NAS signalling connection release" in the UE request type IE in the SERVICE REQUEST message or CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message; or

- has set Request type to "Rejection of paging" in the UE request type IE in the SERVICE REQUEST message or CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message and the UE receives a CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message;

j) shall start the timer T3540 if the UE receives the 5GMM cause value #22 along with a T3346 value, and the value indicates that the timer T3346 is neither zero nor deactivated and the NAS procedure has been initiated in 5GMM-IDLE mode; or

k) shall start the timer T3540 if the UE receives a DEREGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

Upon expiry of T3540,

- in cases a), b), f), g), h), i), j) and k) the UE shall locally release the established N1 NAS signalling connection;

- in cases c) and d) the UE shall locally release the established N1 NAS signalling connection and the UE shall initiate the registration procedure as described in subclause5.5.1.3 or 5.6.1.5; or

- in case e), the UE shall locally release the established N1 NAS signalling connection and perform a new registration procedure as specified in subclause5.5.1.3.2.

In case a),

- upon receiving a request from the upper layers to perform emergency services fallback only for a UE in 3GPP access or establishing an emergency PDU session, the UE shall stop timer T3540 and shall locally release the N1 NAS signalling connection, before proceeding as specified in subclause5.5.1.

In case b) and f),

- upon an indication from the lower layers that the user-plane resources for PDU sessions are set up, the UE shall stop timer T3540 and may send uplink signalling via the existing N1 NAS signalling connection or user data via user plane. If the uplink signalling is associated with emergency services fallback only for a UE in 3GPP access or establishing an emergency PDU session, the UE shall stop timer T3540 and send the uplink signalling via the existing N1 NAS signalling connection;

In case b), f) and i),

- upon receipt of a DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message, the UE shall stop timer T3540 and respond to the network-initiated de-registration request via the existing N1 NAS signalling connection as specified in subclause5.5.2.3;

- upon receipt of a message of a network-initiated 5GMM common procedure, the UE shall stop timer T3540 and respond to the network-initiated 5GMM common procedure via the existing N1 NAS signalling connection as specified in subclause5.4;

- if there is no user-plane resources established for PDU sessions, upon receiving a request from the upper layers to perform emergency services fallback only for a UE in 3GPP access or establishing an emergency PDU session, the UE shall stop timer T3540 and shall locally release the N1 NAS signalling connection, before proceeding as specified in subclause5.6.1;

- if there is no user-plane resources established for PDU sessions, upon receiving a request from the upper layers to perform services other than emergency services fallback only for a UE in 3GPP access or establishing an emergency PDU session, the UE shall wait for the local release of the established N1 NAS signalling connection upon expiry of timer T3540 or wait for timer T3540 being stopped, before initiating NAS signalling;

- upon receipt of a DL NAS TRANSPORT message, the UE shall stop timer T3540 and may send uplink signalling via the existing N1 NAS signalling connection; or

- upon initiation of registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update as specified in subclause5.5.1.2.7 for cases h), i), j), subclause5.5.1.3.7 for cases j), k) or subclause5.5.1.3.2 for case a), the UE shall stop timer T3540.

In case c) and d),

- upon an indication from the lower layers that the access stratum connection has been released, the UE shall stop timer T3540 and perform a new registration procedure as specified in subclause5.5.1.3.5 or 5.6.1.5.

- upon receiving a request from the upper layers to perform emergency services fallback only for a UE in 3GPP access or establishing an emergency PDU session, the UE shall stop timer T3540 and shall locally release the N1 NAS signalling connection, before proceeding as specified in subclause5.5.1.

In case e),

- upon an indication from the lower layers that the access stratum connection has been released, the UE shall stop timer T3540 and perform a new registration procedure as specified in subclause5.5.1.3.2.

- upon an indication from the lower layers that the user-plane resources for PDU sessions are set up, the UE shall stop timer T3540 and may send user data via user plane.

NOTE3: In this case, the new registration procedure is performed when the UE moves to the 5GMM-IDLE mode.

- upon receiving a request from the upper layers to perform emergency services fallback only for a UE in 3GPP access or establishing an emergency PDU session, the UE shall stop timer T3540 and shall locally release the N1 NAS signalling connection, before proceeding as specified in subclause5.5.1.

If the UE had set the Follow-on request indicator to "Follow-on request pending" in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message due to pending uplink signalling but cannot send the pending signalling due to new service area restrictions received or due to network not supporting the feature as indicated in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message (for example UE set the "Follow-on request pending" to send SMS over NAS but AMF notified "SMS over NAS not allowed") and if there is no further pending data or signalling and user plane resources have not been set up, the UE may locally release the established N1 NAS signalling connection upon completion of the registration procedure.

NOTE4: the UE is allowed to inform the lower layers that there is no 5GMM or 5GSM messages need to be sent over non-3GPP access if the UE receives a REGISTRATION REJECT message over non-3GPP access or a SERVICE REJECT message over non-3GPP access.

If the timer T3540 is not running when the UE enters state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH or 5GMM-REGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH, the UE may locally release the N1 NAS signalling connection.

5.3.1.4 5GMM-CONNECTED mode with RRC inactive indication

This subclause is only applicable for UE's 5GMM mode over 3GPP access. The 5GMM-CONNECTED mode with RRC inactive indication is not supported when the UE is in NB-N1 mode.

The UE is in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode with RRC inactive indication when the UE is in:

a) 5GMM-CONNECTED mode over 3GPP access at the NAS layer; and

b) RRC_INACTIVE state at the AS layer (see 3GPPTS38.300[27]).

Unless stated otherwise, the UE behaviour in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode with RRC inactive indication follows the UE behaviour in 5GMM-CONNECTED over 3GPP access, except that:

a) the UE shall apply the mobility restrictions; and

b) the UE shall perform the PLMN selection procedures

as in 5GMM-IDLE mode over 3GPP access.

The UE shall transition from 5GMM-CONNECTED mode over 3GPP access to 5GMM-CONNECTED mode with RRC inactive indication upon receiving an indication from the lower layers that the RRC connection has been suspended.

NOTE1: Any pending procedure or uplink data packet when receiving an indication from the lower layers that the RRC connection has been suspended, triggers a request to the lower layers to transition to RRC_CONNECTED state. This is also the case when the pending procedure or uplink data packet triggered a previous request to the lower layers to transition to RRC_CONNECTED state.

Upon:

a) a trigger of a procedure which requires sending of a NAS message different from a REGISTRATION REQUEST message with the NG-RAN-RCU bit of the 5GS update type IE set to "UE radio capability update needed";

b) an uplink user data packet to be sent for a PDU session with suspended user-plane resources;

c) a trigger to request resources for 5G ProSe direct discovery over PC5 or 5G ProSe direct communication over PC5; or

d) a trigger to request resources for V2X communication over PC5 (see 3GPPTS23.287[6C]);

the UE in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode with RRC inactive indication over 3GPP access shall request the lower layers to transition to RRC_CONNECTED state (see 3GPPTS38.300[27]).

NOTE2: If the UE supports Small Data Transmission (SDT) (see 3GPPTS38.300[27]), the following applies:

a) if the UE due to pending uplink NAS messages or user data packets is requesting the lower layers to transition to RRC_CONNECTED state, but has not received a response from the lower layers, the UE can send the pending NAS messages or user data packets to the lower layers, and can receive multiple downlink NAS messages or multiple downlink user data packets from the lower layers while the UE remains in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode with RRC inactive indication over 3GPP access (i.e., without transitioning to 5GMM-CONNECTED mode). When the NAS layer triggers the transmission of pending uplink NAS messages or user data packets, and if the SDT is ongoing, the NAS layer will receive the response from the lower layers only after the SDT session has completed or failed; 

b) the NAS layer is not aware of the classification of NAS messages or the user data packets as belonging to the SDT session at the lower layers; and

c) the setting of access category and the RRC establishment cause indicated to the lower layers when sending the pending uplink user data packets while the UE remains in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode with RRC inactive indication, is left to implementation.

Upon a trigger to send a REGISTRATION REQUEST message with the NG-RAN-RCU bit of the 5GS update type IE set to "UE radio capability update needed", the UE in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode with RRC inactive indication shall move to 5GMM-IDLE mode over 3GPP access and proceed with the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration as specified in subclause5.5.1.3.2.

The UE shall transition from 5GMM-CONNECTED mode with RRC inactive indication to 5GMM-CONNECTED mode over 3GPP access upon receiving an indication from the lower layers that the UE has transitioned to RRC_CONNECTED state (see 3GPPTS38.300[27]).

NOTE3: The AMF can be aware of the transition between 5GMM-CONNECTED mode and 5GMM-CONNECTED mode with RRC inactive indication for a UE (see 3GPPTS23.502[9]).

The UE shall trigger a transition from 5GMM-CONNECTED mode with RRC inactive indication to 5GMM-IDLE mode upon selection of a PLMN that is not an equivalent PLMN to the registered PLMN. The UE shall not trigger a transition from 5GMM-CONNECTED mode with RRC inactive indication to 5GMM-IDLE mode upon entering a new PLMN which is in the list of equivalent PLMNs.

The UE shall trigger a transition from 5GMM-CONNECTED mode with RRC inactive indication to 5GMM-IDLE mode upon receiving REFRESH command from the UICC as specified in subclause5.4.5.3.3.

If the UE in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode with RRC inactive indication receives an indication from the lower layers that the RRC connection has been suspended, the UE shall stay in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode with RRC inactive indication. The UE shall re-initiate any pending procedure that had triggered the request to the lower layers to transition to RRC_CONNECTED state, if still needed.

When the UE in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode with RRC inactive indication receives a fallback indication from lower layers, and the UE has no pending NAS procedure and no pending uplink user data for PDU session(s) with user-plane resources already established, the UE shall:

a) enter 5GMM-IDLE mode; and

b) initiate the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update as specified for case o) in subclause5.5.1.3.2.

If the UE requests the lower layers to transition to RRC_CONNECTED state at initiation of a registration procedure, a service request procedure or a de-registration procedure, upon fallback indication from lower layers, the UE shall:

- enter 5GMM-IDLE mode;

- proceed with the pending procedure; and

- if the pending procedure is a service request or registration request procedure and the SERVICE REQUEST message, the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message or the REGISTRATION REQUEST message does not include UE request type IE with Request type value set to "NAS signalling connection release", the UE shall include the Uplink data status IE in the SERVICE REQUEST message, the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message or in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, indicating the PDU session(s) without active user-plane resources for which the UE has pending user data to be sent, if any, and the PDU session(s) for which user-plane resources were active prior to receiving the fallback indication, if any (see subclauses5.5.1.3 and 5.6.1 for further details).

If the UE requests the lower layers to transition to RRC_CONNECTED state for other reason than initiation of a registration procedure, or for other reason than a service request procedure, or for other reason than a de-registration procedure, upon fallback indication from lower layers, the UE shall:

1) enter 5GMM-IDLE mode;

2) initiate the service request procedure and include the Uplink data status IE in the SERVICE REQUEST message or the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message indicating the PDU session(s) for which user-plane resources were active prior to receiving the fallback indication, if any (see subclause5.6.1 for further details). If the procedure that triggered the request to the lower layers to transition to RRC_CONNECTED state is the UE-initiated NAS transport procedure and the UE had SMS, location services message, or CIoT user data to send, the UE shall also include the SMS, location services message, or CIoT user data in the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message as described in subclause5.6.1.2.2; and

3) upon successful service request procedure completion, proceed with any pending procedure.

If the UE in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode with RRC inactive indication receives a fallback indication from lower layers, and the UE has pending uplink user data for PDU session(s) with user-plane resources already established but no pending NAS procedure, the UE shall:

1) enter 5GMM-IDLE mode; and

2) initiate the service request procedure and include the Uplink data status IE in the SERVICE REQUEST message or the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message indicating the PDU session(s) for which user-plane resources were active prior to receiving the fallback indication (see subclause5.6.1 for further details).

In the above cases when the UE receives a fallback indication from lower layers, if the UE is in non-allowed area or not in allowed area, the UE shall behave as specified in subclause5.3.5.

If the UE in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode with RRC inactive indication receives an indication from the lower layers that the resumption of the RRC connection has failed, and:

a) if the lower layers indicate that access barring is applicable for all access categories except categories 0 and 2, or access barring is applicable for all access categories except category 0, the UE shall:

1) stay in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode with RRC inactive indication;

b) else, the UE shall:

1) enter 5GMM-IDLE mode; and

2) initiate the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update used for mobility (i.e. the 5GS registration type IE set to "mobility registration updating" in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message) for N1 NAS signalling connection recovery as specified for case f) in subclause5.5.1.3.2.

NOTE4: An indication from the lower layer that the RRC connection has been released with cause "RRC resume failure" can be considered as an indication that the resumption of the RRC connection has failed.

The UE shall transition from 5GMM-CONNECTED mode with RRC inactive indication to 5GMM-IDLE mode over 3GPP access upon receiving from the lower layers:

a) indication of transition from RRC_INACTIVE state to RRC_IDLE state; or

b) indication of cell selection to E-UTRAN or another RAT that the UE supports.

If the UE in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode with RRC inactive indication receives an indication from the lower layers about the cell (re-)selection to different RAT that the UE supports, the UE shall initiate the registration procedure for mobility or periodic registration update used for mobility (i.e. the 5GS registration type IE set to "mobility registration updating" in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message) as specified in subclause5.5.1.3.2.

If the UE in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode with RRC inactive indication receives an indication from the lower layers of a transition from RRC_INACTIVE state to RRC_IDLE state and 5GMM-REGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE is entered, the UE shall subsequently upon entering state 5GMM-REGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE and if there is no uplink user data or signalling pending, initiate the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update used for mobility (i.e. the 5GS registration type IE set to "mobility registration updating" in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message) for N1 NAS signalling connection recovery as specified in subclause5.5.1.3.2.

If the UE in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode with RRC inactive indication receives an indication from the lower layers about RAN paging and the MUSIM UE decides to reject the RAN paging, the UE shall initiate the service request procedure and set request type to "NAS signalling connection release" in the UE request type IE and service type to "signalling" in the SERVICE REQUEST message as specified in subclause5.6.1.2 for case o of subclause5.6.1.1. The UE may include its paging restriction preferences in the Paging restriction IE in the SERVICE REQUEST message as specified in subclause5.6.1.2 for case o of subclause5.6.1.1.

NOTE5: The interworking between the NAS layer and the AS layer triggered by RAN paging is up to UE implementation.

Upon receiving AMF paging indication from the lower layers, the UE shall transition from 5GMM-CONNECTED mode with RRC inactive indication to 5GMM-IDLE mode over 3GPP access and handle the AMF paging same as the paging request received in the 5GMM-IDLE mode over 3GPP access as specified in subclause5.6.1.

5.3.1.5 Suspend and resume of the N1 NAS signalling connection

Suspend of the N1 NAS signalling connection can be initiated by the network in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode when user plane CIoT 5GS optimization is used. Resume of the suspended N1 NAS signalling connection is initiated by the UE.

In the UE, when user plane CIoT 5GS optimization is used:

- Upon idle suspend indication from the lower layers, the UE shall enter 5GMM-IDLE mode with suspend indication, shall not consider the N1 NAS signalling connection released and shall not consider the secure exchange of NAS messages terminated (see subclause4.4.2.5 and 4.4.5).

- Upon trigger of a procedure using an initial NAS message when in 5GMM-IDLE mode with suspend indication, the UE shall:

i) if the initial NAS message is a REGISTRATION REQUEST message with the NG-RAN-RCU bit of the 5GS update type IE set to "UE radio capability update needed", enter 5GMM-IDLE mode without suspend indication and proceed with the registration procedure; or

ii) otherwise, request the lower layer to resume the RRC connection.

NOTE1: In NB-N1 mode, in the request to the lower layer the data volume information of the initial NAS message is provided to the lower layers. Interactions between the NAS and the lower layers in order to obtain the data volume information of the initial NAS message (see 3GPPTS36.321[25E], 3GPP TS 36.331 [25A]) is left to implementations.

- Upon indication from the lower layers that the RRC connection has been resumed when in 5GMM-IDLE mode with suspend indication, the UE shall enter 5GMM-CONNECTED mode. If the pending NAS message is:

i) a SERVICE REQUEST message, the service type IE is not set to "emergency services fallback", and the UE did not include the NAS message container IE in the SERVICE REQUEST message; or

ii) a CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message, and the UE did not include the CIoT small data container IE or the NAS message container IE in the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message,

the message shall not be sent. Otherwise the UE shall cipher the message as specified in subclause4.4.5 and send the pending initial NAS message upon entering 5GMM-CONNECTED mode;

NOTE2: If a NAS message is discarded and not sent to the network, the uplink NAS COUNT value corresponding to that message is reused for the next uplink NAS message to be sent.

- Upon fallback indication from the lower layers at RRC connection resume when in 5GMM-IDLE mode with suspend indication, the UE shall enter 5GMM-IDLE mode without suspend indication, send any pending initial NAS message and proceed as if RRC connection establishment had been requested;

- Upon indication from the lower layers that the RRC connection resume has failed and indication from the lower layers that the RRC connection is suspended, the UE shall enter 5GMM-IDLE mode with suspend indication and restart the ongoing NAS procedure if required; and

- Upon indication from the lower layers that the RRC connection resume has failed and indication from the lower layers that the RRC connection is not idle suspended, the UE shall enter 5GMM-IDLE mode without suspend indication and restart the ongoing NAS procedure if required.

In the network, when user plane CIoT 5GS optimization is used:

- Upon idle suspend indication from the lower layers, the network shall enter 5GMM-IDLE mode with suspend indication, shall not consider the N1 NAS signalling connection released and shall not consider the secure exchange of NAS messages terminated; and

- Upon indication from the lower layers that it has received the NGAP UE context resume request message as specified in 3GPPTS38.413[31] when in 5GMM-IDLE mode with suspend indication, the network shall enter 5GMM-CONNECTED mode.

5.3.2 Permanent identifiers

A globally unique permanent identity, the 5G subscription permanent identifier (SUPI), is allocated to each subscriber for 5GS-based services. The IMSI, the network specific identifier, the GCI and the GLI are valid SUPI types. When the SUPI contains a network specific identifier, a GCI or a GLI, it shall take the form of a network access identifier (NAI). When the UE performs initial registration for onboarding services in SNPN or is registered for onboarding services in SNPN, the SUPI contains the onboarding SUPI derived from the default UE credentials for primary authentication. The UE derives the onboarding SUPI before or during the initial registration for onboarding services in SNPN and uses the derived onboarding SUPI in the initial registration for onboarding services in SNPN and while registered for onboarding services in SNPN.

The structure of the SUPI and its derivatives are specified in 3GPPTS23.003[4].

The UE provides the SUPI to the network in concealed form. The SUCI is a privacy preserving identifier containing the concealed SUPI. When the SUPI contains a network specific identifier, a GCI or a GLI, the SUCI shall take the form of a NAI as specified in 3GPPTS23.003[4].

A UE supporting N1 mode includes a SUCI:

a) in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message when the UE is attempting initial registration procedure and a valid 5G-GUTI is not available;

b) in the IDENTITY RESPONSE message, if the SUCI is requested by the network during the identification procedure; and

c) in the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message when the UE initiates a de-registration procedure and a valid 5G-GUTI is not available.

If the UE uses the "null-scheme" as specified in 3GPPTS33.501[24] to generate a SUCI, the SUCI contains the unconcealed SUPI.

When:

- not operating in SNPN access operation mode; or

- operating in SNPN access operation mode but not performing initial registration for onboarding services and not registered for onboarding services;

the UE shall use the "null-scheme" if:

a) the home network has not provisioned the public key needed to generate a SUCI;

b) the home network has configured "null-scheme" to be used for the UE;

c) the UE needs to perform a registration procedure for emergency services after the failure of authentication procedure or after reception of a REGISTRATION REJECT message with the 5GMM cause #3 "Illegal UE", or to initiate a de-registration procedure before the registration procedure for emergency services was completed successfully, and the UE does not have a valid 5G-GUTI for the selected PLMN; or

d) the UE receives an identity request for SUCI during a registration procedure for emergency services or during a de-registration procedure that was initiated before the registration procedure for emergency services was completed successfully.

When operating in SNPN access operation mode and:

- performing initial registration for onboarding services; or

- registered for onboarding services;

the UE shall use the "null-scheme" if:

a) the public key needed to generate a SUCI is not configured as part of the default UE credentials for primary authentication; or

b) "null-scheme" usage is configured as part of the default UE credentials.

If:

a) the UE uses the "null-scheme" as specified in 3GPPTS33.501[24] to generate a SUCI;

b) the UE operates in SNPN access operation mode and:

1) an indication to use anonymous SUCI which is associated with the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data", is configured in the ME, if the UE is not registering or registered for onboarding services in SNPN; or

2) an indication to use anonymous SUCI which is associated with the default UE credentials, is configured in the ME, if the UE is registering or registered for onboarding services in SNPN;

NOTE1: The ME can be configured with an indication to use anonymous SUCI associated with an entry of "list of subscriber data" when the EAP method associated with the credentials of the entry supports SUPI privacy at the EAP layer, or can be configured with an indication to use anonymous SUCI associated with the default UE credentials when the EAP method associated with the default UE credentials supports SUPI privacy at the EAP layer, or both.

Editor's note: (WI eNPN, CR 4139) it is FFS whether another UE-level configuration for usage of anonymous SUCI is needed.

c) the UE does not need to perform a registration procedure for emergency services, or to initiate a de-registration procedure before the registration procedure for emergency services was completed successfully; and

d) the UE does not receive an identity request for SUCI during a registration procedure for emergency services or during a de-registration procedure that was initiated before the registration procedure for emergency services was completed successfully;

then the UE shall use anonymous SUCI as specified in 3GPPTS23.003[4].

A W-AGF acting on behalf of an FN-RG shall use the "null-scheme" as specified in 3GPPTS33.501[24] to generate a SUCI.

A W-AGF acting on behalf of an N5GC device shall use the "null-scheme" as specified in 3GPPTS33.501[24] to generate a SUCI.

If a UE is a MUSIM UE, the UE shall use a separate permanent equipment identifier (PEI) for each USIM, if any, and each entry of "list of subscriber data", if any, the UE operates for accessing 5GS-based services; otherwise, a UE contains and uses a permanent equipment identifier (PEI) for accessing 5GS-based services. When the UE is registered with a network by using a PEI, the UE shall not use that PEI to register with another network until the UE is de-registered from the network.

In this release of the specification, the IMEI, the IMEISV, the MAC address together with the MAC address usage restriction indication and the EUI-64 are the only PEI formats supported by 5GS. The structure of the PEI and its formats are specified in 3GPPTS23.003[4].

Each UE supporting at least one 3GPP access technology (i.e. satellite NG-RAN, NG-RAN, E-UTRAN, UTRAN or GERAN) contains a PEI in the IMEI format and shall be able to provide an IMEI and an IMEISV upon request from the network.

Each UE not supporting any 3GPP access technologies and supporting NAS over untrusted or trusted non-3GPP access shall have a PEI in the form of the Extended Unique Identifier EUI-64[48] of the access technology the UE uses to connect to the 5GC.

A UE supporting N1 mode includes a PEI:

a) when neither SUPI nor valid 5G-GUTI is available to use for emergency services in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message with 5GS registration type IE set to "emergency registration";

b) when the network requests the PEI by using the identification procedure, in the IDENTITY RESPONSE message; and

c) when the network requests the IMEISV by using the security mode control procedure, in the SECURITY MODE COMPLETE message.

Each 5G-RG supporting only wireline access and each FN-RG shall have a permanent MAC address configured by the manufacturer. For 5G-CRG, the permanent MAC address configured by the manufacturer shall be a cable modem MAC address.

When the 5G-RG contains neither an IMEI nor an IMEISV, the 5G-RG shall use as a PEI the 5G-RG's permanent MAC address configured by the manufacturer and the MAC address usage restriction indication set to "no restrictions".

The W-AGF acting on behalf of the FN-RG shall use as a PEI the MAC address provided by the FN-RG and if the MAC address provided by the FN-RG is not unique or does not correspond to the FN-RG's permanent MAC address according to W-AGF's configuration, the MAC address usage restriction indication set to "MAC address is not usable as an equipment identifier" otherwise the MAC address usage restriction indication set to "no restrictions".

The 5G-RG containing neither an IMEI nor an IMEISV shall include the PEI containing the MAC address together with the MAC address usage restriction indication:

a) when neither SUPI nor valid 5G-GUTI is available to use for emergency services in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message with 5GS registration type IE set to "emergency registration";

b) when the network requests the PEI by using the identification procedure, in the IDENTIFICATION RESPONSE message; and

c) when the network requests the IMEISV by using the security mode control procedure, in the SECURITY MODE COMPLETE message.

NOTE2: In case c) above, the MAC address is provided even though AMF requests the IMEISV.

The W-AGF acting on behalf of the FN-RG shall include the PEI containing the MAC address together with the MAC address usage restriction indication:

a) when the network requests the PEI by using the identification procedure, in the IDENTIFICATION RESPONSE message; and

b) when the network requests the IMEISV by using the security mode control procedure, in the SECURITY MODE COMPLETE message.

NOTE3: In case b) above, the MAC address is provided even though AMF requests the IMEISV.

The W-AGF acting on behalf of the N5GC device shall use as a PEI the MAC address provided by the N5GC device and the MAC address usage restriction indication set to "no restrictions". Based on operator policy, the W-AGF acting on behalf of the N5GC device may encode the MAC address of the N5GC device using the EUI-64 format as specified in [48] and use as a PEI the derived EUI-64.

NOTE4: The MAC address of an N5GC device is universally/globally unique.

The AMF can request the PEI at any time by using the identification procedure.

5.3.3 Temporary identities

A temporary user identity for 5GS-based services, the 5G globally unique temporary identity (5G-GUTI), is used for identification within the signalling procedures. In case of PLMN the 5G-GUTI is globally unique and in case of SNPN the 5G-GUTI is unique within an SNPN. When the UE is registered to the same PLMN or SNPN over 3GPP and non-3GPP access, the UE and the AMF maintain one 5G-GUTI that is common to both 3GPP and non-3GPP access. When the UE is required to delete the 5G-GUTI according to a NAS procedure, the UE shall delete the 5G-GUTI only if it is not registered to the same PLMN or SNPN through other access. When the UE is registered to different PLMNs or SNPNs over 3GPP access and non-3GPP access, the UE maintains two 5G-GUTIs, a 5G-GUTI for the registration with a PLMN or SNPN over the 3GPP access and another 5G-GUTI for the registration with another PLMN or SNPN over the non-3GPP access. In the paging and service request procedures, a shortened form of the 5G-GUTI, the 5G S-temporary mobile subscriber identity (5G-S-TMSI), is used to enable more efficient radio signalling. The purpose of the 5G-GUTI and 5G-S-TMSI is to provide identity confidentiality, i.e., to protect a user from being identified and located by an intruder. The structure of the 5G-GUTI and its derivatives are specified in 3GPPTS23.003[4]. The 5G-GUTI has two main components (see 3GPPTS23.501[8]):

a) the GUAMI; and

b) the 5G-TMSI that provides an unambiguous identity of the UE within the AMF(s) identified by the GUAMI.

NOTE: The UE registered with an SNPN over non-3GPP access refers to the UE accessing SNPN services via a PLMN.

The 5G-S-TMSI has three main components:

a) the AMF set ID that uniquely identifies the AMF set within the AMF region;

b) the AMF pointer that identifies one or more AMFs within the AMF set; and

c) the 5G-TMSI.

A UE supporting N1 mode includes a valid 5G-GUTI, if any is available, in the REGISTRATION REQUEST and DEREGISTRATION REQUEST messages. In the SERVICE REQUEST message, the UE includes a valid 5G-S-TMSI as user identity. The AMF shall assign a new 5G-GUTI for a particular UE:

a) during a successful initial registration procedure;

b) during a successful registration procedure for mobility registration update;

c) after a successful service request procedure invoked as a response to a paging request from the network and before the:

1) release of the N1 NAS signalling connection; or

2) suspension of the N1 NAS signalling connection due to user plane CIoT 5GS optimization i.e. before the UE and the AMF enter 5GMM-IDLE mode with suspend indication;

 as specified in subclause5.4.4.1; and

d) after the AMF receives an indication from the lower layers that it has received the NGAP UE context resume request message as specified in 3GPPTS38.413[31] for a UE in 5GMM-IDLE mode with suspend indication and this resumption is a response to a paging request from the network, and before the:

1) release of the N1 NAS signalling connection; or

2) suspension of the N1 NAS signalling connection due to user plane CIoT 5GS optimization i.e. before the UE and the AMF enter 5GMM-IDLE mode with suspend indication;

 as specified in subclause5.4.4.1.

The AMF should assign a new 5G-GUTI for a particular UE during a successful registration procedure for periodic registration update. The AMF may assign a new 5G-GUTI at any time for a particular UE by performing the generic UE configuration update procedure.

If a new 5G-GUTI is assigned by the AMF, the UE and the AMF handle the 5G-GUTI as follows:

a) Upon receipt of a 5GMM message containing a new 5G-GUTI, the UE considers the new 5G-GUTI as valid and the old 5G-GUTI as invalid, stops timer T3519 if running, and deletes any stored SUCI. The new 5G-GUTI is stored in a non-volatile memory in the USIM if the corresponding file is present in the USIM, else in the non-volatile memory in the ME, as described in annexC.

b) The AMF considers the old 5G-GUTI as invalid as soon as an acknowledgement for a registration or generic UE configuration update procedure is received.

5.3.4 Registration areas

Within the 5GS, the registration area is managed independently per access type, i.e., 3GPP access or non-3GPP access. The AMF assigns a registration area to the UE during the registration procedure. A registration area is defined as a set of tracking areas and each of these tracking areas consists of one or more cells that cover a geographical area. Within the 5GS, the concept of "registration to multiple tracking areas" applies:

a) A tracking area is identified by a TAI which is broadcast in the cells of the tracking area. The TAI is constructed from a TAC and a PLMN identity. In case of a shared network:

1) one or more TACs; and

2) any of the following:

i) multiple PLMN identities;

ii) multiple SNPN identities; or

iii) one or more PLMN identities and one or more SNPN identities;

 are broadcast.

b) In order to reduce the tracking area update signalling within the 5GS, the AMF can assign several tracking areas to the UE. These tracking areas construct a list of tracking areas which is identified by a TAI list. When generating the TAI list, the AMF shall include only TAIs that are applicable on the access where the TAI list is sent. The AMF shall be able to allocate a TAI list over different NG-RAN access technologies. The AMF shall not allocate a TAI list containing both tracking areas in NB-N1 mode and tracking areas not in NB-N1 mode.

c) The UE considers itself registered to a list of tracking areas and does not need to trigger the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update used for mobility (i.e. the 5GS registration type IE set to "mobility registration updating" in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message) as long as the UE stays in one of the tracking areas of the list of tracking areas received from the AMF.

d) The UE will consider the TAI list as valid, until it receives a new TAI list in the next registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update or generic UE configuration update procedure, or the UE is commanded by the network to delete the TAI list by a reject message or it is deregistered from the 5GS. If the registration request is accepted or the TAI list is reallocated by the AMF, the AMF shall provide at least one entry in the TAI list. If the new and the old TAI list are identical, the AMF does not need to provide the new TAI list to the UE during mobility registration update or periodic registration update.

e) The TAI list can be reallocated by the AMF.

f)- When the UE is deregistered from the 5GS, the TAI list in the UE is invalid.

g) The UE includes the last visited registered TAI, if available, to the AMF. The last visited registered TAI is stored in a non-volatile memory in the USIM if the corresponding file is present in the USIM, else in the non-volatile memory in the ME, as described in annexC.

5.3.5 Service area restrictions

5.3.5.1 General

Service area restrictions are applicable only to 3GPP access and to wireline access.

Subclause5.3.5.2 applies when the UE accesses 5GCN over 3GPP access.

Subclause5.3.5.3 applies when the 5G-RG or the W-AGF acting on behalf of an FN-CRG (or on behalf of the N5GC device) access 5GCN over wireline access.

NOTE: Service area restrictions are not applicable for the W-AGF acting on behalf of the FN-BRG.

5.3.5.2 3GPP access service area restrictions

The service area restrictions consist of tracking areas forming either an allowed area, or a non-allowed area. The tracking areas belong to either the registered PLMN or its equivalent PLMNs in the registration area. The allowed area can contain up to 16 tracking areas or include all tracking areas in the registered PLMN and its equivalent PLMN(s) in the registration area. The non-allowed area can contain up to 16 tracking areas. The network conveys the service area restrictions to the UE by including either an allowed area, or a non-allowed area, but not both, in the Service area list IE of a REGISTRATION ACCEPT message or a CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message.

If the network does not convey the service area restrictions to the UE in the Service area list IE of a REGISTRATION ACCEPT message, the UE shall treat all tracking areas in the registered PLMN and its equivalent PLMN(s) in the registration area as allowed area and delete the stored list of "allowed tracking areas" or the stored list of "non-allowed tracking areas".

When the UE receives a Service area list IE with an allowed area indication during a registration procedure or a generic UE configuration update procedure:

a) if the "Type of list" included in the Service area list IE does not indicate "all TAIs belonging to the PLMNs in the registration area are allowed area", the UE shall delete the old list of "allowed tracking areas" and store the tracking areas in the allowed area as the list of "allowed tracking areas". If the UE has a stored list of "non-allowed tracking areas", the UE shall delete that list; or

b) if the "Type of list" included in the Service area list IE indicates "all TAIs belonging to the PLMNs in the registration area are allowed area", the UE shall treat all tracking areas in the registered PLMN and its equivalent PLMN(s) as allowed area and delete the stored list of "allowed tracking areas" or the stored list of "non-allowed tracking areas".

When the UE receives a Service area list IE with a non-allowed area indication during a registration procedure or a generic UE configuration update procedure, the UE shall delete the old list of "non-allowed tracking areas" and store the tracking areas in the non-allowed area as the list of "non-allowed tracking areas". If the UE has a stored list of "allowed tracking areas", the UE shall delete that list.

If the UE is successfully registered to a PLMN and has a stored list of "allowed tracking areas":

a) while the current TAI is in the list of "allowed tracking areas", the UE shall stay in, or enter, the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE and is allowed to initiate any 5GMM and 5GSM procedures; and

b) while the UE is camped on a cell which is in the registered PLMN or a PLMN from the list of equivalent PLMNs and the current TAI is not in the list of "allowed tracking areas", the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.NON-ALLOWED-SERVICE, and:

1) if the UE is in 5GMM-IDLE mode or 5GMM-IDLE mode with suspend indication over 3GPP access, the UE:

i) shall not include the Uplink data status IE in the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update except for emergency services or for high priority access;

ii) shall not perform the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update with Follow-on request indicator set to "Follow-on request pending", except for:

- emergency services;

- high priority access;

- indicating a change of 3GPP PS data off UE status;

- sending an SOR transparent container;

- sending a UE policy container; or

- sending a UE parameters update transparent container;

iii) shall not initiate a service request procedure or request the lower layers to resume a suspended connection, except for:

- emergency services;

- emergency services fallback;

- high priority access;

- responding to paging;

- responding to notification received over non-3GPP access;

- indicating a change of 3GPP PS data off UE status;

- sending an SOR transparent container;

- sending a UE policy container; or

- sending a UE parameters update transparent container; and

2) if the UE is in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode or 5GMM-CONNECTED mode with RRC inactive indication over 3GPP access, the UE:

i) shall not perform the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update with Uplink data status IE except for emergency services or for high priority access;

ii) shall not initiate a service request procedure except for:

- emergency services;

- emergency services fallback;

- high priority access;

- responding to paging or responding to notification received over non-3GPP access;

iii) shall not initiate a 5GSM procedure except for:

- emergency services;

- high priority access; or

- indicating a change of 3GPP PS data off UE status; and

iv) shall not perform the NAS transport procedure except for the sending:

- SMS;

- an LPP message;

- a location services message;

- an SOR transparent container;

- a UE policy container;

- a UE parameters update transparent container; or

- a CIoT user data container.

NOTE1: The contents of CIoT user data container can be data that is not for exception reports, or data that is for exception reports if allowed for the UE (see subclause6.2.13).

If the UE is successfully registered to a PLMN and has a stored list of "non-allowed tracking areas":

a) while the UE is camped on a cell which is in the registered PLMN or a PLMN from the list of equivalent PLMNs and the current TAI is not in the list of "non-allowed tracking areas", the UE shall stay in, or enter, the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE and is allowed to initiate any 5GMM and 5GSM procedures; and

b) while the current TAI is in the list of "non-allowed tracking areas", the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.NON-ALLOWED-SERVICE, and:

1) if the UE is in 5GMM-IDLE mode or 5GMM-IDLE mode with suspend indication over 3GPP access, the UE:

i) shall not include the Uplink data status IE in the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update except for emergency services or for high priority access;

ii) shall not perform the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update with Follow-on request indicator set to "Follow-on request pending", except for:

- emergency services;

- high priority access;

- indicating a change of 3GPP PS data off UE status;

- sending an SOR transparent container;

- sending a UE policy container; or

- sending a UE parameters update transparent container; and

iii) shall not initiate a service request procedure or request the lower layers to resume a suspended connection, except for:

- emergency services;

- emergency services fallback;

- high priority access;

- responding to paging;

- responding to notification received over non-3GPP access;

- indicating a change of 3GPP PS data off UE status;

- sending an SOR transparent container;

- sending a UE policy container; or

- sending a UE parameters update transparent container; and

2) if the UE is in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode or 5GMM-CONNECTED mode with RRC inactive indication over 3GPP access, the UE:

i) shall not perform the registration procedure for mobility and registration update with the Uplink data status IE except for emergency services or for high priority access;

ii) shall not initiate a service request procedure or request the lower layers to resume a suspended connection, except for:

- emergency services;

- emergency services fallback;

- high priority access; or

- responding to paging or responding to notification received over non-3GPP access;

iii) shall not initiate a 5GSM procedure except for:

- emergency services;

- high priority access; or

- indicating a change of 3GPP PS data off UE status; and

iv) shall not perform the NAS transport procedure except for the sending:

- SMS;

- an LPP message;

- a location services message;

- an SOR transparent container;

- a UE policy container;

- a UE parameters update transparent container; or

- a CIoT user data container.

NOTE2: The contents of CIoT user data container can be data that is not for exception reports, or data that is for exception reports if allowed for the UE (see subclause6.2.13).

The list of "allowed tracking areas", as well as the list of "non-allowed tracking areas" shall be erased when:

a) the UE is switched off; and

b) the UICC containing the USIM is removed or an entry of the "list of subscriber data" with the SNPN identity of the SNPN is updated.

When a tracking area is added to the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" or to the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service" as specified in the subclauses5.5.1.2.5 or 5.5.1.3.5, the tracking area shall be removed from the list of "allowed tracking areas" if the tracking area is already present in the list of "allowed tracking areas" and from the list of "non-allowed tracking areas" if the tracking area is already present in the list of "non-allowed tracking areas".

5.3.5.3 Wireline access service area restrictions

If:

a) a SERVICE REJECT message with the 5GMM cause #28 "Restricted service area";

b) a DL NAS TRANSPORT message with the Payload container type IE set to "N1 SM information" and the 5GMM cause #28 "Restricted service area"; or

c) a REGISTRATION ACCEPT message includes the PDU session reactivation result error cause IE with the 5GMM cause #28 "Restricted service area";

is received over wireline access then the 5G-RG or the W-AGF acting on behalf of the FN-CRG (or on behalf of the N5GC device) shall start enforcing the wireline access service area restrictions and shall enter the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.NON-ALLOWED-SERVICE.

While in the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.NON-ALLOWED-SERVICE, the 5G-RG or the W-AGF acting on behalf of the FN-CRG (or on behalf of the N5GC device) shall:

a) if in 5GMM-IDLE mode over wireline access:

1) shall not perform the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update with Uplink data status IE except for emergency services or for high priority access; and

2) shall not initiate a service request procedure except for:

- emergency services,

- emergency services fallback; or

- high priority access; and

b) if in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode over wireline access:

1) shall not perform the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update with Uplink data status IE except for:

- emergency services;

- emergency services fallback; or

- high priority access;

2) shall not initiate a service request procedure except for emergency services, or high priority access; and

3) shall not initiate a 5GSM procedure except for emergency services or high priority access;

over the wireline access.

When the 5G-RG is switched off, the UICC containing the USIM is removed or the 5G-RG starts using another wireline access network, the 5G-RG shall stop enforcing the wireline access service area restrictions, if enforced.

When the W-AGF acting on behalf of the FN-CRG determines that the FN-CRG is switched off, the W-AGF acting on behalf of the FN-CRG stops enforcing the wireline access service area restrictions, if enforced.

When the W-AGF acting on behalf of the N5GC device determines that the FN-CRG serving the N5GC device is switched off, the W-AGF acting on behalf of the N5GC device stops enforcing the wireline access service area restrictions, if enforced.

5.3.6 Mobile initiated connection only mode

The UE can request the use of mobile initiated connection only (MICO) mode during the registration procedure (see 3GPPTS23.501[8] and 3GPPTS23.502[9]). The UE shall not request use of MICO mode over non-3GPP access. Furthermore, the UE in 3GPP access shall not request the use of MICO mode during:

a) a registration procedure for initial registration for emergency services (see subclause5.5.1.2);

b) a registration procedure for initial registration for initiating an emergency PDU session (see subclause5.5.1.2);

c) a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update (see subclause5.5.1.3) for initiating an emergency PDU session if the UE is in the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-REGISTRATION-UPDATE; or

d) a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update (see subclause5.5.1.3) when the UE has an emergency PDU session established.

If the UE requests the use of MICO mode, the network can accept the use of MICO mode by providing a MICO indication when accepting the registration procedure. The UE may use MICO mode only if the network has provided the MICO indication IE during the last registration procedure. The UE may also request an active time value together with the MICO mode indication during the registration procedure.

If the network accepts the use of MICO mode and does not include an active time value in T3324 IE to the UE, the AMF may include an "all PLMN registration area allocated" indication in the MICO indication IE to the UE. If the UE indicated the support for strictly periodic registration timer in the MICO indication IE to the network, the network may include a "strictly periodic registration timer supported" indication in the MICO indication IE to the UE.

If the UE requested the use of active time by including an active time value and the network accepts the use of MICO mode and the use of active time, the AMF shall include an active time value in the T3324 IE to the UE. If the AMF indicates active time value to the UE, AMF should not indicate "all PLMN registration area allocated" indication in the MICO indication IE to the UE. Upon entering 5GMM-IDLE mode, AMF shall start the active timer with the active time value indicated to the UE and shall consider the UE is reachable for paging as long as the timer is running. If the UE enters 5GMM-CONNECTED mode over 3GPP access when the active timer is running, the AMF shall stop the active timer.

NOTE1: The active time value assigned by AMF can be different from the active time value requested by the UE. AMF assigns the active time value based on several factors, e.g. local configuration, expected UE behaviour, UE requested active time value, UE subscription information, network policies etc.

If the network accepts the use of MICO mode, the UE may deactivate the AS layer and activate MICO mode by entering the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.NO-CELL-AVAILABLE if:

a) the UE is in 5GMM-IDLE mode over3GPP access;

b) the UE is in the 5GMM-REGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE or 5GMM-REGISTERED.NON-ALLOWED-SERVICE (as described in subclause5.3.5.2) state for 3GPP access; and

c) no T3324 value is received from the network.

If the network accepts the use of MICO mode and indicates an active time value to the UE in a successful registration procedure, the UE shall start the timer T3324 with the value received from the network after entering 5GMM-IDLE mode over 3GPP access. At the expiry of the timer T3324, the UE may activate MICO mode by entering the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.NO-CELL-AVAILABLE if the UE is in the 5GMM-REGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE or 5GMM-REGISTERED.NON-ALLOWED-SERVICE (as described in subclause5.3.5.2) state for 3GPP access. If the UE enters 5GMM-CONNECTED mode over 3GPP access when the timer T3324 is running, the UE shall stop the timer T3324.

When MICO mode is activated, all NAS timers are stopped and associated procedures aborted except for timers T3512, T3346, T3447, T3396, T3584, T3585, any back-off timers, T3247, and the timer T controlling the periodic search for HPLMN or EHPLMN or higher prioritized PLMNs (see 3GPPTS23.122[5]).

NOTE2: When MICO mode is activated and if the UE is also registered over the non-3GPP access, the AMF will not send a NOTIFICATION message with access type indicating 3GPP access over the non-3GPP access for PDU sessions associated with 3GPP access.

The UE may deactivate MICO mode and activate the AS layer at any time. Upon deactivating MICO mode, the UE may initiate 5GMM procedures (e.g. for the transfer of mobile originated signalling or user data).

When an emergency PDU session is successfully established after the MICO mode was enabled, the UE and the AMF shall locally disable MICO mode. The UE and the AMF shall not enable MICO mode until the AMF accepts the use of MICO mode in the next registration procedure. To enable an emergency call back, the UE should wait for a UE implementation-specific duration of time before requesting the use of MICO mode after the completion of the emergency services.

If the AMF accepts the use of MICO mode and does not indicate "strictly periodic registration timer supported" in the MICO indication IE to the UE, the AMF starts the implicit de-registration timer for 3GPP access when entering 5GMM-IDLE mode for 3GPP access. If AMF accepts the use of MICO mode and indicates "strictly periodic registration timer supported" in the MICO indication IE to the UE, AMF shall start the strictly periodic monitoring timer with T3512 value indicated in the T3512 value IE after the registration procedure is completed. The AMF shall neither stop nor reset the strictly periodic monitoring timer when the NAS signalling connection is established or released for the UE. If the strictly periodic monitoring timer expires when NAS signalling connection is established for the UE, AMF shall restart the strictly periodic monitoring timer with the T3512 value, otherwise AMF shall start the implicit de-registration timer.

When an emergency PDU session is successfully established and the MICO mode is disabled, the UE shall stop timer T3512 if running and the AMF shall stop strictly periodic monitoring timer if running. The UE and the AMF shall behave as if no "strictly periodic registration timer supported" indication was given to the UE in the last registration attempt.

Upon successful completion of an attach procedure or tracking area updating procedure after inter-system change from N1 mode to S1 mode (see 3GPPTS24.301[15]), the UE operating in single-registration mode shall locally disable MICO mode. After inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode, the UE operating in single-registration mode may re-negotiate MICO mode with the network during the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update.

5.3.7 Handling of the periodic registration update timer and mobile reachable timer

The periodic registration update procedure is used over 3GPP access to periodically notify the availability of the UE to the network. The procedure is controlled in the UE by the periodic registration update timer, T3512.

If the UE is registered over the 3GPP access, the AMF maintains an implicit de-registration timer to control when the UE is considered implicitly de-registered over the 3GPP access. If the UE is registered over the non-3GPP access, the AMF also maintains a non-3GPP implicit de-registration timer to control when the UE is considered implicitly de-registered over the non-3GPP access. The UE registered over the non-3GPP access maintains a non-3GPP de-registration timer to control when the UE is considered implicitly de-registered for the non-3GPP access.

The AMF shall start a non-3GPP implicit de-registration timer for the UE registered over non-3GPP access when the N1 NAS signalling connection over non-3GPP access is released.

The UE registered over non-3GPP access shall reset and start a non-3GPP de-registration timer when the N1 NAS signalling connection over non-3GPP access is released. The non-3GPP de-registration timer is stopped when the UE enters 5GMM-CONNECTED mode over non-3GPP access or the 5GMM-DEREGISTERED state over non-3GPP access.

The non-3GPP implicit de-registration timer shall be longer than the non-3GPP de-registration timer.

The value of timer T3512 is sent by the network to the UE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. The UE shall apply this value in all tracking areas of the list of tracking areas assigned to the UE until a new value is received. The periodic registration update timer only applies to the UE registered to the 5GS services over 3GPP access.

If timer T3512 received by the UE in a REGISTRATION ACCEPT message contains an indication that the timer is deactivated or the timer value is zero, then timer T3512 is deactivated and the UE shall not perform the periodic registration update procedure.

NOTE1: The UE does not perform the periodic registration update procedure for non-3GPP access.

If during the registration procedure, the AMF does not indicate "strictly periodic registration timer supported" in the MICO indication IE to the UE, timer T3512 is reset and started with its initial value, when the UE changes from 5GMM-CONNECTED over 3GPP access to 5GMM-IDLE mode over 3GPP access. Timer T3512 is stopped when the UE enters 5GMM-CONNECTED mode over 3GPP access or the 5GMM-DEREGISTERED state over 3GPP access.

If during the registration procedure, the AMF indicates "strictly periodic registration timer supported" in the MICO indication IE to the UE, timer T3512 is started with its initial value after the completion of the registration procedure. The UE shall neither stop nor reset the timer T3512 when the UE enters 5GMM-CONNECTED or when changing from 5GMM-CONNECTED mode to 5GMM-IDLE mode. If the timer T3512 expires,

a) the UE in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode over 3GPP access shall reset and start the timer T3512 with its initial value; or

b) the UE in 5GMM-IDLE mode over 3GPP access shall perform the periodic registration procedure.

If the UE is registered for emergency services, and timer T3512 expires, the UE shall not initiate a periodic registration update procedure, but shall locally de-register from the network. When the UE is camping on a suitable cell, it may re-register to regain normal service.

When a UE is not registered for emergency services, and timer T3512 expires when the UE is in 5GMM-IDLE mode, the periodic registration update procedure shall be started.

If the UE is not registered for emergency services, and is in a state other than 5GMM-REGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE or 5GMM-REGISTERED.NON-ALLOWED-SERVICE over 3GPP access when timer T3512 expires, the periodic registration update procedure is delayed until the UE returns to 5GMM-REGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE or 5GMM-REGISTERED.NON-ALLOWED-SERVICE over 3GPP access.

NOTE2: When the UE returns to 5GMM-REGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE or 5GMM-REGISTERED.NON-ALLOWED-SERVICE and it needs to initiate other 5GMM procedure than the periodic registration update procedure then, based on UE implementation, the 5GMM procedure can take precedence.

The network supervises the periodic registration update procedure of the UE by means of the mobile reachable timer.

If the UE is not registered for emergency services, the mobile reachable timer shall be longer than the value of timer T3512. In this case, by default, the mobile reachable timer is 4 minutes greater than the value of timer T3512.

The network behaviour upon expiry of the mobile reachable timer is network dependent, but typically the network stops sending paging messages to the UE on the first expiry, and may take other appropriate actions.

If the UE is registered for emergency services, the AMF shall set the mobile reachable timer with a value equal to timer T3512. When the mobile reachable timer expires, the AMF shall locally de-register the UE.

The mobile reachable timer shall be reset and started with the value as indicated above, when the AMF releases the NAS signalling connection for the UE. The mobile reachable timer shall be stopped when a NAS signalling connection is established for the UE.

Upon expiry of the mobile reachable timer the network shall start the implicit de-registration timer over 3GPP access. The value of the implicit de-registration timer over 3GPP access is network dependent. If MICO mode is activated, the network shall start the implicit de-registration timer over 3GPP access when the UE enters 5GMM-IDLE mode at the AMF over 3GPP access. The default value of the implicit de-registration timer over 3GPP access is 4 minutes greater than the value of timer T3512.

If the implicit de-registration timer expires before the UE contacts the network, the network shall implicitly de-register the UE. The implicit de-registration timer shall be stopped when a NAS signalling connection is established for the UE.

If the non-3GPP implicit de-registration timer expires before the UE contacts the network over the non-3GPP access, the network shall implicitly de-register the UE and enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED over non-3GPP access for the UE. The non-3GPP implicit de-registration timer shall be stopped when a NAS signalling connection over non-3GPP access is established for the UE.

If the non-3GPP de-registration timer expires before the UE contacts the network over the non-3GPP access, the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED over non-3GPP access. The non-3GPP de-registration timer shall be stopped when a NAS signalling connection over non-3GPP access is established for the UE.

If the AMF provides T3346 value IE in the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message with Access type set to "Non-3GPP access" in Deregistration type IE, REGISTRATION REJECT message during a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update or SERVICE REJECT message and the value of timer T3346 is greater than the value of timer T3512, the AMF sets the mobile reachable timer and the implicit de-registration timer such that the sum of the timer values is greater than the value of timer T3346.

If the AMF provides T3346 value IE in the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message with Access type set to "3GPP access" in Deregistration type IE, REGISTRATION REJECT message during a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update or SERVICE REJECT message and the value of timer T3346 is greater than the value of the non-3GPP de-registration timer, the AMF sets the non-3GPP implicit de-registration timer value to be 8 minutes greater than the value of timer T3346.

If the UE receives T3346 value IE in the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message with Access type set to "3GPP access" in Deregistration type IE, REGISTRATION REJECT message during a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update or SERVICE REJECT message and the value of timer T3346 is greater than the value of the non-3GPP de-registration timer, the UE sets the non-3GPP de-registration timer value to be 4 minutes greater than the value of timer T3346.

5.3.8 Handling of timer T3502

The value of timer T3502 can be sent by the network to the UE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. The UE shall apply this value in all tracking areas of the registration area assigned to the UE, until a new value is received.

The value of timer T3502 can be sent by the network to the UE in the REGISTRATION REJECT message during the initial registration. If a REGISTRATION REJECT message including timer T3502 value was received integrity protected, the UE shall apply this value until a new value is received with integrity protection or a new PLMN is selected. Otherwise, the default value of this timer is used.

The default value of this timer is also used by the UE in the following cases:

a) REGISTRATION ACCEPT message is received without a value specified;

b) the UE does not have a stored value for this timer;

c) a new PLMN which is not in the list of equivalent PLMNs has been entered, the initial registration procedure fails, the registration attempt counter is equal to 5 and no REGISTRATION REJECT message was received from the new PLMN;

d) the network indicates that the timer is "deactivated"; or

e) a new PLMN which is not in the list of equivalent PLMNs has been entered, the mobility and periodic update registration procedure fails and the registration attempt counter is equal to 5.

5.3.9 Handling of NAS level mobility management congestion control

The AMF may detect 5GMM signalling congestion and perform general NAS level congestion control. Under the 5GMM signalling congestion conditions the AMF may reject 5GMM signalling requests from UEs as specified in 3GPPTS23.501[8]. The AMF should not reject the following:

a) requests for emergency services;

b) requests for emergency services fallback;

c) requests from UEs configured for high priority access in selected PLMN;

d) DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message;

e) requests for mobile terminated services, triggered by paging or a notification procedure; and

f) requests for initial registration or mobility and periodic registration update, when emergency is indicated by lower layers.

When general NAS level congestion control is active, the AMF may include a value for the mobility management back-off timer T3346 in the reject messages. The UE starts the timer T3346 with the value received in the 5GMM reject messages. To avoid that large numbers of UEs simultaneously initiate deferred requests, the AMF should select the value for the timer T3346 for the rejected UEs so that timeouts are not synchronised.

If the UE is registered in the same PLMN over the 3GPP access and non-3GPP access, and the UE receives the timer T3346 from the AMF, the timer T3346 shall apply to both 3GPP access and non-3GPP access.

If the UE receives the paging message or NOTIFICATION message when timer T3346 is running and the UE is registered to the same PLMN over 3GPP access and non-3GPP access, the UE shall stop the timer T3346 for both accesses and respond to the paging message or NOTIFICATION message as specified in subclause5.6.2 and subclause5.6.3.

NOTE1: As an implementation option, MUSIM UE is allowed to not respond to paging based on the information available in the paging message, e.g. voice service indication.

If the timer T3346 is running when the UE enters state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED, the UE remains switched on, and the USIM in the UE remains the same, then the timer T3346 is kept running until it expires or it is stopped.

If the UE is switched off when the timer T3346 is running, the UE shall behave as follows when the UE is switched on and the USIM in the UE remains the same:

 let t1 be the time remaining for T3346 timeout at switch off and let t be the time elapsed between switch off and switch on. If t1 is greater than t, then the timer shall be restarted with the value t1t. If t1 is equal to or less than t, then the timer need not be restarted. If the UE is not capable of determining t, then the UE shall restart the timer with the value t1.

If the UE enters a new PLMN while timer T3346 is running, and the new PLMN is not equivalent to the PLMN where the UE started timer T3346, the UE shall stop timer T3346 when initiating 5GMM procedures in the new PLMN.

After a change in registration area, if the timer T3346 is running and 5GS update status is 5U1 UPDATED then the UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U2 NOT UPDATED and enter state 5GMM-REGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-REGISTRATION-UPDATE.

If timer T3346 is running or is deactivated, and the UE is a UE configured for high priority access in selected PLMN, or the UE needs to initiate signalling for emergency services or emergency services fallback, then the UE is allowed to initiate 5GMM procedures.

NOTE2: UE can, based on implementation, restrict lower layers of non-3GPP access from establishing access stratum connection on a registered PLMN when timer T3346 is running for the same PLMN.

5.3.10 Handling of DNN based congestion control

The AMF may detect and start performing DNN based congestion control when one or more DNN congestion criteria as specified in 3GPPTS23.501[8] are met. If the UE does not provide a DNN for a non-emergency PDU session, then the AMF uses the selected DNN or the DNN associated with the PDU session corresponding to the 5GSM procedure.

When DNN based congestion control is activated at the AMF, the AMF performs the congestion control as specified in subclause5.4.5 and the UE performs the congestion control as specified in subclause5.4.5 and subclause6.2.7.

5.3.11 Handling of S-NSSAI based congestion control

The AMF may detect and start performing S-NSSAI based congestion control when one or more S-NSSAI congestion criteria as specified in 3GPPTS23.501[8] are met. If the UE does not provide a DNN for a non-emergency PDU session, then the AMF uses the selected DNN or the DNN associated with the PDU session corresponding to the 5GSM procedure. If the UE does not provide an S-NSSAI for a non-emergency PDU session, then the AMF uses the selected S-NSSAI or the S-NSSAI associated with the PDU session corresponding to the 5GSM procedure.

When S-NSSAI based congestion control is activated at the AMF, the AMF performs the congestion control as specified in subclause5.4.5 and the UE performs the congestion control as specified in subclause5.4.5 and subclause6.2.8.

5.3.12 Handling of local emergency numbers

The additional requirements in subclause5.3.12A apply to a UE supporting registration or attach procedures via 3GPP access and registration procedures via non-3GPP access.

In case of PLMN, the network may send a local emergency numbers list or an extended local emergency numbers list or both, in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message, by including the Emergency number list IE and the Extended emergency number list IE, respectively. The Local emergency numbers list can be updated as described in 3GPPTS24.301[15], subclause5.3.7.

In case of SNPN, the network may send an extended local emergency numbers list, in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message, by including the Extended emergency number list IE. The network shall set the Extended Emergency Number List Validity (EENLV) field within the Extended emergency number list IE to "Extended Local Emergency Numbers List is valid only in the PLMN from which this IE is received". The UE shall consider the emergency number(s) received in the Extended emergency number list IE valid only in the SNPN from which this IE is received regardless of the received value of the EENLV field within the Extended emergency number list IE.

The UE shall store the local emergency numbers list and the extended local emergency numbers list, as provided by the network. The local emergency numbers list stored in the UE shall be replaced on each receipt of the Emergency number list IE. The extended local emergency numbers list stored in the UE shall be replaced on each receipt of the Extended emergency number list IE. The received local emergency numbers list or the received extended local emergency numbers list or both shall be provided to the upper layers.

If a REGISTRATION ACCEPT message is received via non-3GPP access from a PLMN in a country different from the current country of the UE, the UE shall keep the stored local emergency numbers list and the extended local emergency numbers list, if available.

The emergency number(s) received in the Emergency number list IE are valid only in PLMNs in the same country as the PLMN from which this IE is received. If no Emergency number list IE is contained in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message, then the stored local emergency numbers list in the UE shall be kept, except if the UE has successfully registered to a PLMN in a country different from that of the PLMN that sent the list.

The emergency number(s) received in the Extended emergency number list IE are valid only in:

- PLMNs in the same country as the PLMN from which this IE is received, if the Extended Emergency Number List Validity (EENLV) field within the Extended emergency number list IE indicates "Extended Local Emergency Numbers List is valid in the country of the PLMN from which this IE is received"; and

- the PLMN from which this IE is received, if the EENLV field within the Extended emergency number list IE indicates "Extended Local Emergency Numbers List is valid only in the PLMN from which this IE is received"; and

- the SNPN from which this IE is received, regardless of the value of the EENLV field within the Extended emergency number list IE.

If no Extended Local Emergency Numbers List is contained in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message, and the registered PLMN or the registered SNPN has not changed, then the stored Extended Local Emergency Numbers List in the UE shall be kept. If no Extended Local Emergency Numbers List is contained in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message, but the registered PLMN or the registered SNPN has changed, then:

- if the last received indication in the EENLV field within the Extended emergency number list IE indicates "Extended Local Emergency Numbers List is valid only in the PLMN from which this IE is received", the stored Extended Local Emergency Numbers List in the UE shall be deleted; and

- if the last received indication in the EENLV field within the Extended emergency number list IE indicates "Extended Local Emergency Numbers List is valid in the country of the PLMN from which this IE is received" the list shall be kept except if the UE has successfully registered to a PLMN in a country different from that of the PLMN that sent the stored list.

NOTE: To prevent the misrouting of emergency calls, all operators within a country need to follow the regulation or agree on the setting of the Extended emergency number list IE in accordance to national agreement  either to indicate validity within a country or to indicate validity only within the PLMN.

The local emergency numbers list and the extended local emergency numbers list shall be deleted at switch off or removal of the USIM. The UE shall be able to store up to ten entries in the local emergency numbers list and up to twenty entries in the Extended local emergency numbers list, received from the network.

For the use of the local emergency numbers list and the extended local emergency numbers list by the UE see 3GPPTS24.301[15], subclause5.3.7.

5.3.12A Handling of local emergency numbers received via 3GPP access and non-3GPP access

5.3.12A.1 General

The requirements in subclause5.3.12 with the clarifications and additional conditions in subclause5.3.12A apply to a UE supporting:

- attach procedures (see 3GPPTS24.301[15]) or registration procedures via 3GPP access; and

- registration procedures via non-3GPP access.

The UE shall ignore the presence or absence of local emergency numbers list, extended local emergency numbers list or both, in a REGISTRATION ACCEPT message received via non-3GPP access, unless conditions in subclause5.3.12A.2 are met.

For the purposes of subclause5.3.12A, the UE is considered neither registered nor attached over 3GPP access if:

1) the UE supports 3GPP access to EPC, the UE does not support 3GPP access to 5GC, and:

a) the EMM sublayer is in the EMM-NULL state, EMM-DEREGISTERED state or EMM-DEREGISTERED-INITIATED state; or

2) the UE supports 3GPP access to 5GC, the UE does not support 3GPP access to EPC, and:

a) the 5GMM sublayer is in the 5GMM-NULL state, 5GMM-DEREGISTERED state or 5GMM-DEREGISTERED-INITIATED state; or

3) supports both 3GPP access to EPC and 3GPP access to 5GC, and:

a) the EMM sublayer is in the EMM-NULL state, EMM-DEREGISTERED state or EMM-DEREGISTERED-INITIATED state; and

a) the 5GMM sublayer is in the 5GMM-NULL state, 5GMM-DEREGISTERED state or 5GMM-DEREGISTERED-INITIATED state.

5.3.12A.2 Receiving a REGISTRATION ACCEPT message via non-3GPP access

If the UE can determine the current country and after switch on or after removal of the USIM, has not been registered or has not been attached via 3GPP access in the current country, then the UE shall store the local emergency numbers list or the extended local emergency numbers list or both, as provided by the network with an MCC matching the current country via non-3GPP access.

NOTE: The UE determines, as the current country, the country in which it is located in accordance with 3GPPTS24.502[18].

The UE shall replace a previously stored local emergency numbers list or a previously stored extended local emergency numbers list or both with a local emergency numbers list or an extended local emergency numbers list or both received in a REGISTRATION ACCEPT message via non-3GPP access, if the previously stored local emergency numbers list was also received via non-3GPP access or the previously stored extended local emergency numbers list was also received via non-3GPP access.

The UE shall replace a previously stored extended local emergency numbers list with an extended local emergency numbers list received in a REGISTRATION ACCEPT message via non-3GPP access, if:

- the UE is neither registered nor attached over 3GPP access;

- the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message is received from a PLMN different from which the stored list was received; and

- the stored indication in the EENLV field within the Extended emergency number list IE indicates "Extended Local Emergency Numbers List is valid only in the PLMN from which this IE is received".

If no extended local emergency numbers list is contained in a REGISTRATION ACCEPT message received via non-3GPP access and the UE is neither registered nor attached over 3GPP access, the stored extended local emergency numbers list in the UE shall be discarded if:

- the UE can determine the current country and the UE has successfully registered to a PLMN in the country and that country is different from that of the PLMN that sent the stored list; or

- the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message is received from a PLMN different from which the stored list was received, and the stored indication in the EENLV field within the Extended emergency number list IE indicates "Extended Local Emergency Numbers List is valid only in the PLMN from which this IE is received".

5.3.13 Lists of 5GS forbidden tracking areas

If the UE is not operating in SNPN access operation mode, the UE shall store a list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming", as well as a list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service". Otherwise the UE shall store a list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming":

- per SNPN; and

- if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, per entry of the "list of subscriber data" or PLMN subscription;

and store a list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service":

- per SNPN; and

- if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, per entry of the "list of subscriber data" or PLMN subscription.

Within the 5GS, these lists are managed independently per access type, i.e., 3GPP access or wireline access. These lists shall be erased when:

a) the UE is switched off, the UICC containing the USIM is removed, an entry of the "list of subscriber data" with the subscribed SNPN identity identifying the current SNPN is updated or, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the entry of the "list of subscriber data" associated with the lists is updated; and

b) periodically (with a period in the range 12 to 24 hours).

Over 3GPP access, when the lists are erased, the UE performs cell selection according to 3GPPTS38.304[28] or 3GPPTS36.304[25C]. A tracking area shall be removed from the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming", as well as the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service", if the UE receives the tracking area in the TAI list or the Service area list of "allowed tracking areas" in REGISTRATION ACCEPT message or a CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message. The UE shall not remove the tracking area from "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" or "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service" if the UE is registered for emergency services.

In N1 mode over 3GPP access, the UE shall update the suitable list whenever a REGISTRATION REJECT, SERVICE REJECT or DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message is received with the 5GMM cause #12 "tracking area not allowed", #13 "roaming not allowed in this tracking area", or #15 "no suitable cells in tracking area", or a REGISTRATION ACCEPT or SERVICE ACCEPT message is received with the forbidden TAI(s).

Over wireline access, the 5G-RG, the W-AGF acting on behalf of an FN-RG or the W-AGF acting on behalf of an N5GC device shall update the suitable list whenever a REGISTRATION REJECT, SERVICE REJECT or DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message is received with the 5GMM cause #12 "tracking area not allowed" or #13 "roaming not allowed in this tracking area".

NOTE: In this release of the specification, for untrusted non-3GPP access and trusted non-3GPP access, neither the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" nor the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service" is maintained by the UE since the UE is not able to determine the corresponding TAI.

Each list shall accommodate 40 or more TAIs. When the list is full and a new entry has to be inserted, the oldest entry shall be deleted.

5.3.13A Forbidden PLMN lists

In N1 mode, two lists of forbidden PLMN are managed independently per access type, i.e., 3GPP access or non-3GPP access:

- the list of "forbidden PLMNs" as defined in 3GPPTS23.122[5] is applicable for 3GPP access in N1 mode. The same list is used by 5GMM for 3GPP access, EMM, GMM and MM (see 3GPPTS24.301[15] and 3GPPTS24.008[12]), regardless whether the UE is operating in single-registration mode or dual-registration mode.

- the list of "forbidden PLMNs for non-3GPP access to 5GCN" as defined in 3GPP TS 24.502[18] is applicable for 5GMM for non-3GPP access.

The list of "forbidden PLMNs for GPRS service" as defined in 3GPPTS23.122[5] and 3GPPTS24.008[12] is applicable for 3GPP access in N1 mode. The same list is used by 5GMM for 3GPP access, EMM and GMM (see 3GPPTS24.301[15] and 3GPPTS24.008[12]), regardless whether the UE is operating in single-registration mode or dual-registration mode.

5.3.14 List of equivalent PLMNs

The UE shall store a list of equivalent PLMNs. These PLMNs shall be regarded by the UE as equivalent to each other for PLMN selection and cell selection/re-selection. The same list is used by 5GMM, EMM, GMM and MM (see 3GPPTS24.301[15] and 3GPPTS24.008[12]) except for the case when the UE operates in dual-registration mode (see subclause4.8.3).

The UE shall update or delete this list at the end of each registration procedure. The stored list consists of a list of equivalent PLMNs as downloaded by the network plus the PLMN code of the registered PLMN that downloaded the list. When the UE is switched off, the UE shall keep the stored list so that it can be used for PLMN selection after switch on. The UE shall delete the stored list if the USIM is removed or when the UE registered for emergency services enters the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED. The maximum number of possible entries in the stored list is 16.

5.3.15 Transmission failure abnormal case in the UE

The abnormal case 5GMM uplink message transmission failure indication by lower layers can be identified for 5GMM procedures:

 When it is specified in the relevant procedure that it is up to the UE implementation to re-run the ongoing procedure that triggered that procedure, the procedure can typically be re-initiated using a retransmission mechanism of the uplink message (i.e. the one that has previously failed to be transmitted) with new sequence number and message authentication code information thus avoiding to re-start the whole procedure.

NOTE: The transmission failure can happen due to TAI change. The lower layer might take some time to read the system information and determine if the current TAI is changed. Therefore, the information of TAI change can be sent to the NAS layer a little after receiving the transmission failure indication from the lower layer. How to handle the retransmission procedure caused by the possible delayed TAI change information is up to UE implementation.

5.3.16 Extended DRX cycle for UEs in 5GMM-IDLE and 5GMM-CONNECTED mode with RRC inactive indication

Extended DRX (eDRX) cycle is supported for a UE in N1 mode. When eDRX is requested by the UE and accepted by the network:

- if the UE is not in NB-N1 mode, eDRX is used when the UE is in 5GMM-IDLE mode or in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode with RRC inactive indication; or

- if the UE is in NB-N1 mode, eDRX is used when the UE is in 5GMM-IDLE mode.

The UE may request the use of eDRX cycle during a registration procedure by including the Requested extended DRX parameters IE (see 3GPPTS23.501[8] and 3GPPTS23.502[9]). The UE shall not request the use of eDRX during a registration procedure for emergency services. The UE may use the extended idle mode DRX cycle length stored in the USIM (see 3GPPTS31.102[22]) when requesting the use of eDRX.

The UE and the network may negotiate eDRX parameters during a registration procedure when the UE has an emergency PDU session.

The network accepts the request to use the eDRX by providing the Negotiated extended DRX parameters IE when accepting the registration procedure. The UE shall use eDRX only if it received the Negotiated extended DRX parameters IE during the last registration procedure and the UE does not have an emergency PDU session.

NOTE: If the UE wants to keep using eDRX, the UE includes the Extended DRX parameters IE in each registration procedure.

If the UE received the Negotiated extended DRX parameters IE during the last registration procedure, upon successful completion of the PDU session release procedure of the emergency PDU session, the UE shall resume eDRX.

If the network has provided the Negotiated extended DRX parameters IE during the last registration procedure, upon successful completion of the PDU session release procedure of the emergency PDU session, the network shall resume eDRX.

If the UE or the network locally releases an emergency PDU session, the UE or the network shall not use eDRX until the UE receives eDRX parameters during a registration procedure with PDU session context synchronization or upon successful completion of a service request procedure with PDU session context synchronization.

If the UE did not receive the Negotiated extended DRX parameters IE, or if the UE has an emergency PDU session, the UE shall use the stored UE specific DRX parameter, if available.

If the network did not accept the request to use eDRX, or if the UE has an emergency PDU session, the network shall use the stored UE specific DRX parameter, if available.

If the network provided the Negotiated extended DRX parameters IE and also assigned a new 5G-GUTI for the UE as described in subclause5.5.1.3.4 during the last registration procedure, the network shall use the stored UE specific DRX parameter, if available, with the old 5G-GUTI and use the eDRX provided by the network with the new 5G-GUTI until the old 5G-GUTI can be considered as invalid by the network (see subclauses5.4.4.4 and5.5.1.3.4).

5.3.17 Service Gap Control

Service gap control (SGC) only applies to 3GPP access.

The network may control the frequency with which UEs can transition from 5GMM-IDLE mode to 5GMM-CONNECTED mode via the SGC as specified in 3GPPTS23.501[8] and 3GPPTS23.502[9]. If the network supports SGC and the service gap time value i.e. T3447 value is available in the 5GMM context of the UE, the AMF shall consider SGC as active for the UE.

The UE and the network negotiate usage of SGC during the registration procedure for initial registration and registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update:

- the UE supporting SGC indicates its support in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message. If the UE supports SGC and the SGC is active for the UE, the AMF includes T3447 value IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message (see subclause5.5.1.2 and subclause5.5.1.3). The UE stores the T3447 value; and

- for UEs that do not support SGC when the network rejects mobility management signalling requests because SGC is active in the network, the mechanism for general NAS level mobility management congestion control as specified in subclause5.3.9 applies.

The network can provide a new T3447 value to the UE to be used next time it is started or stop timer T3447 in the UE if running with the Generic UE configuration update procedure as specified in subclause5.4.4.

The UE shall start timer T3447 when the N1 NAS signalling connection is released and if:

- the UE supports SGC, and the T3447 value is available in the UE and does not indicate zero; and

- the N1 NAS signalling connection released was not established for:

- paging;

- registration procedure for initial registration with Follow-on request indicator set to "No follow-on request pending";

- registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update with Follow-on request indicator set to "No follow-on request pending" and without Uplink data status IE included;

- requests for emergency services; or

- requests for exception data reporting.

If the SGC is active in the network, after the UE transitions from 5GMM-CONNECTED mode to 5GMM-IDLE mode except when the UE was in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode due to:

- paging;

- registration procedure for initial registration with Follow-on request indicator set to "No follow-on request pending";

- registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update with Follow-on request indicator set to "No follow-on request pending" and without Uplink data status IE included,

- requests for emergency services; or

- requests for exception data reporting,

the network shall start timer T3447 if not already running:

- with the T3447 value available in the 5GMM context minus 4 minutes, if the UE supports SGC and the T3447 value has been sent to the UE with a non-zero value; or

- with the T3447 value available in the 5GMM context if the UE does not support SGC.

When timer T3447 is running, the network allows:

- requests for emergency service;

- requests for emergency services fallback;

- requests for high priority access;

- requests for exception data reporting;

- registration procedure for initial registration with Follow-on request indicator set to "No follow-on request pending";

- registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update without Uplink data status IE included and with Follow-on request indicator set to "No follow-on request pending"; or

- service request procedure or registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update triggered by paging and subsequent MO signalling or MO data, if any, until the UE enters 5GMM-IDLE mode.

The UE or the network with a running T3447 timer keeps the timer running when the UE transits from 5GMM-IDLE mode to 5GMM-CONNECTED mode.

NOTE: If the UE transitions from 5GMM-IDLE mode to 5GMM-CONNECTED mode due to registration procedure for initial registration with Follow-on request indicator set to "No follow-on request pending" or mobility and periodic registration update request without Uplink data status IE and with Follow-on request indicator set to "No follow-on request pending", the UE initiates no further MO signalling except for mobility and periodic registration update requests without Uplink data status and with Follow-on request indicator set to "No follow-on request pending" until the UE receives mobile terminated signalling (e.g. DL NAS TRANSPORT message for MT SMS) or MT data over user plane, or after the UE has moved to 5GMM-IDLE state and the service gap timer is not running.

If timer T3447 is running when the UE changes PLMN or enters state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED, the UE remains switched on, and the USIM in the UE remains the same, then timer T3447 is kept running until it expires.

If the AMF determines that the UE operating in single-registration mode has performed an inter-system change from N1 mode to S1 mode and the timer T3447 is running in the AMF, the AMF stops the T3447.

Upon inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode, if the UE supports service gap control, T3447 is running in the UE, and the T3447 value IE is included in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message received from the AMF (see subclause5.5.1.2 and subclause5.5.1.3), the UE shall keep T3447 running. Additionally, the UE shall store and replace the currently stored service gap time value with the received T3447 value. Upon expiry of the running T3447 timer, the UE shall use the new value when starting T3447 again.

If the UE is switched off when the timer T3447 is running, the UE shall behave as follows when the UE is switched on and the USIM in the UE remains the same:

- let t1 be the time remaining for timer T3447 timeout at switch off and let t be the time elapsed between switch off and switch on. If t1 is greater thant, then the timer shall be restarted with the value t1  t. If t1 is equal to or less than t, then the timer need not be restarted. If the UE is not capable of determining t, then the UE shall restart the timer with the value t1.

5.3.18 Restriction on use of enhanced coverage

In order to deal with use of extensive resources from the network, the operator may prevent specific subscribers from using enhanced coverage (see 3GPPTS23.501[8]). When in NB-N1 mode, the UE shall indicate support for restriction on use of enhanced coverage. When in WB-N1 mode, the UE supporting either CE mode A or CE mode B shall indicate support for restriction on use of enhanced coverage. The UE supporting restriction on use of enhanced coverage indicates its support for restriction on use of enhanced coverage in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message. If the UE supports restriction on use of enhanced coverage, the AMF indicates in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message (see subclause5.5.1.2 and subclause5.5.1.3) that:

a) when in WB-N1 mode, whether CE mode B is restricted for the UE, or both CE mode A and CE mode B are restricted for the UE, or both CE mode A and CE mode B are not restricted for the UE; or

b) when in NB-N1 mode, whether the use of enhanced coverage is restricted or not for the UE.

If:

a) the use of enhanced coverage is restricted;

b) the use of CE mode B is restricted; or

c) the use of CE mode A and CE mode B is restricted,

the UE shall not use enhanced coverage in the registered PLMN and in any PLMN which is in the list of equivalent PLMNs.

If the UE supports CE mode B and the network determines that

a) the use of enhanced coverage is not restricted for the UE; or

b) CE mode B is not restricted for the UE,

the applicable NAS timer values shall be calculated by the network as described in subclause4.19 and subclause4.20.

For a UE that supports restriction on use of enhanced coverage or CE mode B, if:

a) the AMF determines to enforce a change in restriction on the use of enhanced coverage or a change in the restriction on the use of CE mode B as described in 3GPPTS23.501[8]; and

b) the UE is in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode and there is no ongoing registration procedure,

the AMF shall initiate the generic UE configuration update procedure to indicate registration requested and release of the N1 NAS signalling connection not requested as described in subclause5.4.4. After the successful completion of the registration procedure for mobility registration update including change of the restriction on the use of enhanced coverage, for any SMF with which the UE has an established PDU session, the AMF updates the SMF with the indication on the use of extended NAS timer setting as described in 3GPPTS23.501[8] and 3GPPTS23.502[9].

5.3.19 Handling of congestion control for transport of user data via the control plane

The network may activate congestion control for transport of user data via the control plane, as specified in 3GPPTS23.501[8].

If the UE has indicated support for the control plane CIoT 5GS optimizations and the network decides to activate the congestion control for transport of user data via the control plane, the network may include a value for the control plane data back-off timer T3448 in REGISTRATION ACCEPT, SERVICE ACCEPT or SERVICE REJECT message, and shall store an control plane data back-off time on a per UE basis. The UE starts the timer T3448 with the value informed in the message. To avoid that large numbers of UEs simultaneously initiate deferred requests, the network should select the value for the timer T3448 for the informed UEs so that timeouts are not synchronised.

The network sends REGISTRATION ACCEPT message or SERVICE ACCEPT message without T3448 value IE to stop the timer T3448 running in the UE as specified in subclause5.5.1.3.4 and subclause5.6.1.4.

Based on the stored control plane data back-off time for the UE, the network may reject the transfer of user data via the control plane initiated by the UE.

While the timer T3448 is running, the UE in 5GMM-IDLE mode does not initiate the transport of user data via the control plane procedure, except if the UE is allowed to use exception data reporting (see the ExceptionDataReportingAllowed leaf of the NAS configuration MO in 3GPPTS24.368[17] or the USIM file EFNASCONFIG in 3GPPTS31.102[22]) and the user data is related to an exceptional event.

The UE is allowed:

a) to respond to paging with CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message without uplink data; or

b) to send a CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message for emergency services or for emergency services fallback;

even if the timer T3448 is running.

Upon entering the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED or a new PLMN which is not equivalent to the PLMN where the UE started the timer T3448, or upon being switched off while the timer T3448 is running, the UE stops the timer T3448.

5.3.19a Specific requirements for UE configured to use timer T3245

5.3.19a.1 UE not operating in SNPN access operation mode

The following requirements apply for a UE that is configured to use timer T3245 (see 3GPPTS24.368[17] or 3GPPTS31.102[22]).

When the UE adds a PLMN identity to the "forbidden PLMN list" or sets the USIM as invalid for 5GS services for 3GPP access or non-3GPP access, and timer T3245 (see 3GPPTS24.008[12]) is not running, the UE shall start timer T3245 as specified in 3GPPTS24.008[12], subclause4.1.1.6.

Upon expiry of the timer T3245, the UE shall erase the "forbidden PLMN list" and "forbidden PLMNs for GPRS service" list and set the USIM to valid for 5GS services for 3GPP access and non-3GPP access. When the lists are erased, the UE performs cell selection according to 3GPPTS38.304[28] or 3GPPTS36.304[25C].

If the UE is switched off when the timer T3245 is running, the UE shall behave as follows when the UE is switched on and the USIM in the UE remains the same:

- let t1 be the time remaining for T3245 timeout at switch off and let t be the time elapsed between switch off and switch on. If t1 is greater than t, then the timer shall be restarted with the value t1  t. If t1 is equal to or less than t, then the UE will follow the behaviour as defined in the paragraph above upon expiry of the timer T3245. If the UE is not capable of determining t, then the UE shall restart the timer with the value t1.

5.3.19a.2 UE operating in SNPN access operation mode

The following requirements apply for a UE that is configured to use timer T3245 (see 3GPPTS24.368[17]).

When the UE adds an SNPN to the "permanently forbidden SNPNs" list or "temporarily forbidden SNPNs" list which are, if the MS supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, associated with the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription, or sets the selected entry  of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription as invalid for 3GPP access or non-3GPP access, and timer T3245 (see 3GPPTS24.008[12]) is not running, the UE shall start timer T3245 with a random value, uniformly drawn from the range between 12h and 24h.

Upon expiry of the timer T3245, the UE shall erase the "permanently forbidden SNPNs" list(s) and "temporarily forbidden SNPNs" list(s) and set the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription to valid for 3GPP access and non-3GPP access. When the lists are erased, the UE performs cell selection according to 3GPPTS38.304[28].

If the UE is switched off when the timer T3245 is running, the UE shall behave as follows when the UE is switched on and the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription remain the same:

- let t1 be the time remaining for T3245 timeout at switch off and let t be the time elapsed between switch off and switch on. If t1 is greater than t, then the timer shall be restarted with the value t1  t. If t1 is equal to or less than t, then the UE will follow the behaviour as defined in the paragraph above upon expiry of the timer T3245. If the UE is not capable of determining t, then the UE shall restart the timer with the value t1.

5.3.20 Specific requirements for UE when receiving non-integrity protected reject messages

5.3.20.1 General

This subclause specifies the requirements for a UE that is not configured to use timer T3245 (see 3GPPTS24.368[17] or 3GPPTS31.102[22]) and receives a REGISTRATION REJECT or SERVICE REJECT message without integrity protection with specific 5GMM causes.

NOTE: Additional UE requirements for this case, requirements for other 5GMM causes, and requirements for the case when the UE receives an integrity protected reject message are specified in subclauses5.5.1 and 5.6.1.

5.3.20.2 Requirements for UE in a PLMN

The UE shall maintain:

- a list of PLMN-specific attempt counters (see 3GPPTS24.301[15]). The maximum number of possible entries in the list is implementation dependent. This list is applicable to access attempts via 3GPP access only;

- a list of PLMN-specific attempt counters for non-3GPP access, if the UE supports non-3GPP access. The maximum number of possible entries in the list is implementation dependent. This list is applicable to access attempts via non-3GPP access only;

- a list of PLMN-specific N1 mode attempt counters for 3GPP access. The maximum number of possible entries in the list is implementation dependent. This list is applicable to access attempts via 3GPP access only;

- a list of PLMN-specific N1 mode attempt counters for non-3GPP access, if the UE supports non-3GPP access. The maximum number of possible entries in the list is implementation dependent. This list is applicable to access attempts via non-3GPP access only;

- one counter for "SIM/USIM considered invalid for GPRS services" events (see 3GPP TS 24. 008 [12]); and

- one counter for "USIM considered invalid for 5GS services over non-3GPP access" events, if the UE supports non-3GPP access.

A UE supporting non-EPS services shall maintain one counter for "SIM/USIM considered invalid for non-GPRS services" events (see 3GPP TS 24.008 [12]).

The UE shall store the above lists of attempt counters and the event counters in its non-volatile memory. The UE shall erase the lists and reset the event counters to zero when the UICC containing the USIM is removed. The counter values shall not be affected by the activation or deactivation of MICO mode or power saving mode (see 3GPPTS24.301[15]).

The UE implementation-specific maximum value for any of the above counters shall not be greater than 10.

NOTE1: Different counters can use different UE implementation-specific maximum values.

If the UE receives a REGISTRATION REJECT or SERVICE REJECT message without integrity protection with 5GMM cause value #3, #6, #7, #11, #12, #13, #15, #27, #31, #62, #72 or #73 before the network has established secure exchange of NAS messages for the N1 NAS signalling connection, the UE shall stop timer T3510 or T3517 if running, and start timer T3247 (see 3GPPTS24.008[12]) with a random value uniformly drawn from the range between 30 minutes and 60 minutes, if the timer is not running, and take the following actions:

1) if the 5GMM cause value received is #3, #6 or #7, and:

a) if the 5GMM cause value is received over 3GPP access, the UE shall:

i) if the UE is already registered over another access:

- store the current TAI in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming", memorize the current TAI was stored in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" for non-integrity protected NAS reject message and enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE; and

- search for a suitable cell in another tracking area according to 3GPPTS38.304[28] or 3GPPTS36.304[25C]; or

ii) otherwise, if the counter for "SIM/USIM considered invalid for GPRS services" events has a value less than a UE implementation-specific maximum value,

- set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2) and shall delete 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and ngKSI for 3GPP access;

- if the 5GMM cause value received is #3 or #6, delete the list of equivalent PLMNs if any;

- increment the counter for "SIM/USIM considered invalid for GPRS services" events;

- if the 5GMM cause value received is #3 or #6, and if the counter for "SIM/USIM considered invalid for non-GPRS services" events has a value less than a UE implementation-specific maximum value, increment the counter;

- if a registration procedure was performed, reset the registration attempt counter and if a service request procedure was performed, reset the service request attempt counter;

- if the UE is operating in single-registration mode, handle the EMM parameters EMM state, EPS update status, EPS attach attempt counter, tracking area updating attempt counter or service request attempt counter, 4G-GUTI, TAI list, eKSI as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] for the case when the EPS attach, tracking area updating procedure or service request procedure is rejected with the EMM cause of the same value in a NAS message without integrity protection;

- store the current TAI in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming", memorize the current TAI was stored in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" for non-integrity protected NAS reject message and enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE; and

- search for a suitable cell in another tracking area according to 3GPPTS38.304[28] or 3GPPTS36.304[25C]; and as a UE implementation option, the UE may perform registration attempt over the non-3GPP access, if non-3GPP access is available, and the USIM is not considered invalid for 5GS services over non-3GPP access; and

iii) otherwise proceed as specified in subclauses5.5.1 and 5.6.1;

b) if the 5GMM cause value is received over non-3GPP access, the UE shall:

i) if the UE is already registered over another access:

- enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE; and

- may perform registration attempt over the non-3GPP access if another access point for non-3GPP access is available; or

ii) otherwise, if the counter for "USIM considered invalid for 5GS services over non-3GPP access" events has a value less than a UE implementation-specific maximum value,

- set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause 5.1.3.2.2) and shall delete the 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and ngKSI for non-3GPP access;

- enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE;

- increment the counter for "USIM considered invalid for 5GS services over non-3GPP access" events; and as a UE implementation option, the UE may either perform registration attempt over the non-3GPP access if another access point for non-3GPP access is available, or if 3GPP access is available, and the SIM/USIM is not considered invalid for 5GS services over 3GPP access, perform registration attempt over the 3GPP access; and

NOTE2: How to select another access point for non-3GPP access is implementation specific.

iii) otherwise proceed as specified in subclauses5.5.1 and 5.6.1;

2) if the 5GMM cause value received is #12, #13 or #15, the UE shall proceed as specified in subclauses5.5.1 and 5.6.1. Additionally, the UE may:

a) if the 5GMM cause value is received over 3GPP access, non-3GPP access is available, the UE is not registered over non-3GPP access yet, and the USIM is not considered invalid for 5GS services over non-3GPP access, perform registration attempt over the non-3GPP access; or

b) if the 5GMM cause value is received over non-3GPP access, 3GPP access is available, the UE is not registered over 3GPP access yet, and the USIM is not considered invalid for 5GS services over 3GPP access, perform registration attempt over the 3GPP access;

3) if the 5GMM cause value received is #11 or #73 and the UE is in its HPLMN or EHPLMN:

a) if the 5GMM cause value is received over 3GPP access, the UE shall:

- set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2) and shall delete, the 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list, ngKSI for 3GPP access and the list of equivalent PLMNs. Additionally, if a registration procedure was performed, the UE shall reset the registration attempt counter and if a service request procedure was performed, reset the service request attempt counter;

- if the 5GMM cause value received is #11 and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, handle the EMM parameters EMM state, EPS update status, EPS attach attempt counter, tracking area updating attempt counter or service request attempt counter, 4G-GUTI, TAI list, eKSI as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] for the case when the EPS attach, tracking area updating procedure or service request procedure is rejected with the EMM cause of the same value in a NAS message without integrity protection;

- if the 5GMM cause value received is #73 and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall in addition set the EPS update status to EU3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED and shall delete any 4G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and eKSI. Additionally, the UE shall reset the attach attempt counter or tracking area updating attempt counter, and enter the state EMM-DEREGISTERED;

- store the current TAI in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming", memorize the current TAI was stored in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" for non-integrity protected NAS reject message and enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE; and

- search for a suitable cell in another tracking area according to 3GPPTS38.304[28] or 3GPPTS36.304[25C]; and as a UE implementation option, the UE may perform registration attempt over the non-3GPP access, if non-3GPP access is available, the UE is not registered over non-3GPP access yet, and the USIM is not considered invalid for 5GS services over non-3GPP access;

b) if the 5GMM cause value is received over non-3GPP access, the UE shall:

- set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2) and shall delete the 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and ngKSI for non-3GPP access. Additionally, if a registration procedure was performed, the UE shall reset the registration attempt counter and if a service request procedure was performed, reset the service request attempt counter; and

- enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE. As a UE implementation option, the UE may perform registration attempt over the non-3GPP access if another access point for non-3GPP access is available, or if 3GPP access is available, the UE is not registered over 3GPP access yet, and the USIM is not considered invalid for 5GS services over 3GPP access, perform registration attempt over the 3GPP access;

4) if the 5GMM cause value received is #11 or #73 and the UE is not in its HPLMN or EHPLMN, in addition to the UE requirements specified in subclause5.5.1 and 5.6.1:

- if the message was received via 3GPP access and if the PLMN-specific attempt counter for the PLMN sending the reject message has a value less than a UE implementation-specific maximum value, the UE shall increment the PLMN-specific attempt counter for the PLMN; or

- if the message was received via non-3GPP access and if the PLMN-specific attempt counter for non-3GPP access for the PLMN sending the reject message has a value less than a UE implementation-specific maximum value, the UE shall increment the PLMN-specific attempt counter for non-3GPP access for the PLMN;

5) if the 5GMM cause value received is #27, the UE shall proceed as specified in subclauses5.5.1 and 5.6.1. Additionally, if the PLMN-specific N1 mode attempt counter for the respective access type and for the PLMN sending the reject message has a value less than a UE implementation-specific maximum value, the UE shall increment this counter for the PLMN;

6) if the 5GMM cause value received is #72, the UE shall proceed as specified in subclauses5.5.1 and 5.6.1. Additionally, if the PLMN-specific N1 mode attempt counter for non-3GPP access for the PLMN sending the reject message has a value less than a UE implementation-specific maximum value, the UE shall increment this counter for the PLMN;

7) if the 5GMM cause value received is #31 for a UE that has indicated support for CIoT optimizations, the UE may discard the message or alternatively the UE should:

- set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2);

- store the current TAI in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming", memorize the current TAI was stored in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" for non-integrity protected NAS reject message; and

- search for a suitable cell in another tracking area according to 3GPPTS38.304[28] or 3GPPTS36.304[25C]; and

8) if the 5GMM cause value received is #62, the UE may discard the message or alternatively the UE should:

- set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2);

- store the current TAI in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming", memorize the current TAI was stored in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" for non-integrity protected NAS reject message; and

- search for a suitable cell in another tracking area according to 3GPPTS38.304[28] or 3GPPTS36.304[25C].

Upon expiry of timer T3247, the UE shall:

- remove all tracking areas from the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service" and the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming", which were stored in these lists for non-integrity protected NAS reject message;

- set the USIM to valid for 5GS services for 3GPP access, if:

- the counter for "SIM/USIM considered invalid for GPRS services" events has a value less than a UE implementation-specific maximum value;

- set the USIM to valid for 5GS services for non-3GPP access, if:

- the counter for "USIM considered invalid for 5GS services over non-3GPP access" events has a value less than a UE implementation-specific maximum value;

- set the USIM to valid for non-EPS services, if:

- the counter for "SIM/USIM considered invalid for non-GPRS services" events has a value less than a UE implementation-specific maximum value;

- for each PLMN-specific attempt counter that has a value greater than zero and less than a UE implementation-specific maximum value, remove the respective PLMN from the extension of the "forbidden PLMNs" list;

- for each PLMN-specific attempt counter for non-3GPP access that has a value greater than zero and less than a UE implementation-specific maximum value, remove the respective PLMN from the list of "forbidden PLMNs for non-3GPP access to 5GCN";

- re-enable the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access and, for each PLMN-specific N1 mode attempt counter for 3GPP access that has a value greater than zero and less than a UE implementation-specific maximum value, remove the respective PLMN from the list of PLMNs where N1 mode is not allowed for 3GPP access (see 3GPPTS23.122[5]);

- re-enable the N1 mode capability for non-3GPP access and, for each PLMN-specific N1 mode attempt counter for non-3GPP access that has a value greater than zero and less than a UE implementation-specific maximum value, remove the respective PLMN from the list of PLMNs where N1 mode is not allowed for non-3GPP access;

- if the UE is supporting A/Gb mode or Iu mode, perform the actions as specified in 3GPPTS24.008[12] for the case when timer T3247 expires;

- if the UE is supporting S1 mode, perform the actions as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] for the case when timer T3247 expires; and

- initiate a registration procedure, if still needed, dependent on 5GMM state and 5GS update status, or perform PLMN selection according to 3GPPTS23.122[5].

When the UE is switched off, the UE shall, for each PLMN-specific attempt counter that has a value greater than zero and less than the UE implementation-specific maximum value, remove the respective PLMN from the list of "forbidden PLMNs". When the USIM is removed, the UE should perform this action.

When the UE is switched off, the UE shall, for each PLMN-specific attempt counter for non-3GPP access that has a value greater than zero and less than the UE implementation-specific maximum value, remove the respective PLMN from the list of "forbidden PLMNs for non-3GPP access to 5GCN". When the USIM is removed, the UE should perform this action.

NOTE3: If the respective PLMN was stored in the extension of the "forbidden PLMNs" list, then according to 3GPPTS23.122[5] the UE will delete the contents of this extension when the UE is switched off or the USIM is removed.

5.3.20.3 Requirements for UE in an SNPN

If the UE is operating in SNPN access operation mode, the UE shall maintain, for each of the entries in the "list of subscriber data":

- one SNPN-specific attempt counter for 3GPP access. The counter is applicable to access attempts via 3GPP access only;

- one SNPN-specific attempt counter for non-3GPP access, if the UE supports accessing SNPN services via a PLMN. The counter is applicable in case of accessing SNPN services via a PLMN only;

- one counter for "the entry for the current SNPN considered invalid for 3GPP access" events; and

- one counter for "the entry for the current SNPN considered invalid for non-3GPP access" events, if the UE supports accessing SNPN services via a PLMN. The counter is applicable in case of accessing SNPN services via a PLMN only.

NOTE1: The term "non-3GPP access" used in the counter for "SNPN-specific attempt counter for non-3GPP access" events and the counter for "the entry for the current SNPN considered invalid for non-3GPP access" events, is used to express access to SNPN services via a PLMN.

The UE shall store the above counters in its non-volatile memory. The UE shall erase the attempt counters and reset the event counters to zero when the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" is updated or USIM is removed for the selected PLMN subscription. The counter values shall not be affected by the activation or deactivation of MICO mode or power saving mode (see 3GPPTS24.301[15]).

The UE implementation-specific maximum value for any of the above counters shall not be greater than 10.

NOTE2: Different counters can use different UE implementation-specific maximum values.

If the UE receives a REGISTRATION REJECT or SERVICE REJECT message without integrity protection with 5GMM cause value #3, #6, #7, #12, #13, #15, #27, #72, #74, or #75 before the network has established secure exchange of NAS messages for the N1 NAS signalling connection, the UE shall stop timer T3510 or T3517, if running, and start timer T3247 (see 3GPPTS24.008[12]) with a random value uniformly drawn from the range between:

a) 15 minutes and 30 minutes for 5GMM cause value #74; or

b) 30 minutes and 60 minutes for other 5GMM cause values;

if the timer is not running, and take the following actions:

a) if the 5GMM cause value received is #3, #6, or #7 and the UE is neither registered for onboarding services in SNPN nor performing initial registration for onboarding services in SNPN:

1) if the 5GMM cause value is received over 3GPP access:

i) if the UE is already registered over another access, the UE shall:

A) store the current TAI in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" for the current SNPN and, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription, memorize the current TAI was stored in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" for the current SNPN and, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription, for non-integrity protected NAS reject message and enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE; and

B) search for a suitable cell in another tracking area according to 3GPPTS38.304[28]; or

ii) otherwise if the counter for "the entry for the current SNPN considered invalid for 3GPP access" events has a value less than a UE implementation-specific maximum value, the UE shall:

A) set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2) and shall delete 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list, and ngKSI for 3GPP access;

B) increment the counter for "the entry for the current SNPN considered invalid for 3GPP access" events;

C) reset the registration attempt counter in case of a REGISTRATION REJECT message or reset the service request attempt counter in case of a SERVICE REJECT message;

D) store the current TAI in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" for the current SNPN and, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription, memorize the current TAI was stored in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" for the current SNPN and, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription, for non-integrity protected NAS reject message, and enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE; and

E) search for a suitable cell in another tracking area according to 3GPPTS38.304[28]. As a UE implementation option, if accessing SNPN services via a PLMN is available and the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription is not considered invalid for non-3GPP access, then the UE may attempt to access SNPN services via a PLMN; or

iii) otherwise, the UE shall proceed as specified in subclauses5.5.1 and 5.6.1;

2) if the 5GMM cause value is received over non-3GPP access:

NOTE3: A 5GMM cause value "received over non-3GPP access" in this subclause refers to a 5GMM cause value received via a PLMN when the UE attempts to access SNPN services via a PLMN.

i) if the UE is already registered over another access, the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE; or

ii) otherwise if the counter for "the entry for the current SNPN considered invalid for non-3GPP access" events has a value less than a UE implementation-specific maximum value, the UE shall:

A) set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2) and shall delete the 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list, and ngKSI for non-3GPP access;

B) enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE; and

C) increment the counter for "the entry for the current SNPN considered invalid for non-3GPP access" events. As a UE implementation option, if 3GPP access is available and the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription is not considered invalid for 3GPP access, then the UE may make a registration attempt over 3GPP access; or

iii) otherwise, the UE shall proceed as specified in subclauses5.5.1 and 5.6.1;

b) if the 5GMM cause value received is #12, #13, or #15, the UE shall proceed as specified in subclauses5.5.1 and 5.6.1. Additionally:

1) if the 5GMM cause value is received over 3GPP access, accessing SNPN services via a PLMN is available, the UE has not accessed SNPN services via a PLMN yet, and the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription is not considered invalid for non-3GPP access, the UE may attempt to access SNPN services via a PLMN; or

2) if the 5GMM cause value is received over non-3GPP access, 3GPP access is available, the UE is not registered to the current SNPN over 3GPP access yet, and the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription is not considered invalid for 3GPP access, the UE may make a registration attempt over 3GPP access;

NOTE4: The network does not send 5GMM cause value #13 to the UE operating in SNPN access operation mode in this release of specification.

c) if the 5GMM cause value received is #27, the UE shall proceed as specified in subclauses5.5.1 and 5.6.1. Additionally, if the SNPN-specific attempt counter for the respective access type and for the current SNPN has a value less than a UE implementation-specific maximum value, the UE shall increment this counter for the SNPN;

c1) if the 5GMM cause value received is #72, the UE shall proceed as specified in subclauses5.5.1 and 5.6.1. Additionally, if the SNPN-specific attempt counter for non-3GPP access for the current SNPN has a value less than a UE implementation-specific maximum value, the UE shall increment this counter for the SNPN; and

d) if: 

1) the 5GMM cause value received is #74 or #75; or

2) the 5GMM cause value received is #3, #6, or #7 and the UE is registered for onboarding services in SNPN or performing initial registration for onboarding services in SNPN;

 in addition to the UE requirements specified in subclauses5.5.1 and 5.6.1:

1) if the message was received via 3GPP access and if the SNPN-specific attempt counter for 3GPP access for the SNPN sending the reject message has a value less than a UE implementation-specific maximum value, the UE shall increment the SNPN-specific attempt counter for 3GPP access for the SNPN; or

2) if the message was received via non-3GPP access and if the SNPN-specific attempt counter for non-3GPP access for the SNPN sending the reject message has a value less than a UE implementation-specific maximum value, the UE shall increment the SNPN-specific attempt counter for non-3GPP access for the SNPN.

NOTE5: The message "received via non-3GPP access" in this subclause refers to a message received via a PLMN when the UE attempts to access SNPN services via a PLMN.

Upon expiry of timer T3247, the UE shall:

- remove, for each SNPN, all tracking areas from the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service" and the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" for the SNPN and, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription, which were stored in these lists for non-integrity protected NAS reject message;

- set each entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the PLMN subscription to valid for 3GPP access, if the corresponding counter for "the entry for the current SNPN considered invalid for 3GPP access" events has a value less than a UE implementation-specific maximum value;

- set each entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the PLMN subscription to valid for non-3GPP access, if the corresponding counter for "the entry for the current SNPN considered invalid for non-3GPP access" events has a value less than a UE implementation-specific maximum value;

- remove each SNPN identity from the "permanently forbidden SNPNs" list for 3GPP access or "temporarily forbidden SNPNs" list for 3GPP access which are, if the MS supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, associated with the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription, if the corresponding SNPN-specific attempt counter for 3GPP access has a value greater than zero and less than a UE implementation-specific maximum value and the SNPN identity is included in any of the "permanently forbidden SNPNs" list for 3GPP access or "temporarily forbidden SNPNs" list for 3GPP access;

- remove each SNPN identity from the "permanently forbidden SNPNs" list for non-3GPP access or "temporarily forbidden SNPNs" list for non-3GPP access which are, if the MS supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, associated with the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription, if the corresponding SNPN-specific attempt counter for non-3GPP access has a value greater than zero and less than a UE implementation-specific maximum value and the SNPN identity is included in any of the "permanently forbidden SNPNs" list for non-3GPP access or "temporarily forbidden SNPNs" list for non-3GPP access;

- re-enable the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access and, for each SNPN-specific attempt counter for 3GPP access that has a value greater than zero and less than a UE implementation-specific maximum value, remove the respective SNPN from the list of SNPNs for which the N1 mode capability was disabled due to receipt of a reject from the network with 5GMM cause #27 "N1 mode not allowed" (see 3GPPTS23.122[5]);

- re-enable the N1 mode capability for non-3GPP access and, for each SNPN-specific attempt counter for non-3GPP access that has a value greater than zero and less than a UE implementation-specific maximum value, remove the respective SNPN from the list of SNPNs for which N1 mode capability was disabled for non-3GPP access due to receipt of a reject from the network with 5GMM cause #27 "N1 mode not allowed" or 5GMM cause #72 "non-3GPP access to 5GCN not allowed"; and

- initiate a registration procedure, if still needed, dependent on 5GMM state and 5GS update status, or perform SNPN selection according to 3GPPTS23.122[5].

When the UE is switched off or a UICC containing the USIM is removed:

- for each SNPN-specific attempt counter for 3GPP access having a value greater than zero and less than the UE implementation-specific maximum value, the UE shall remove the respective SNPN identity from the "permanently forbidden SNPNs" list(s) for 3GPP access or "temporarily forbidden SNPNs" list(s) for 3GPP access, if available; and

- for each SNPN-specific attempt counter for non-3GPP access having a value greater than zero and less than the UE implementation-specific maximum value, the UE shall remove the respective SNPN identity from the "permanently forbidden SNPNs" list(s) for non-3GPP access or "temporarily forbidden SNPNs" list(s) for non-3GPP access, if available.

When an entry of the "list of subscriber data" is updated:

- if the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder and the SNPN-specific attempt counter for 3GPP access for the SNPN corresponding to the entry has a value greater than zero and less than the UE implementation-specific maximum value, the UE shall remove the SNPN identity corresponding to the entry from the "permanently forbidden SNPNs" list for 3GPP access or "temporarily forbidden SNPNs" list for 3GPP access, if available;

- if the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder and the SNPN-specific attempt counter for non-3GPP access for the SNPN corresponding to the entry has a value greater than zero and less than the UE implementation-specific maximum value, the UE shall remove the SNPN identity corresponding to the entry from the "permanently forbidden SNPNs" list for non-3GPP access or "temporarily forbidden SNPNs" list for non-3GPP access, if available;

- if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder and the SNPN-specific attempt counter for 3GPP access for an SNPN in the "permanently forbidden SNPNs" list for 3GPP access or "temporarily forbidden SNPNs" list for 3GPP access, associated with the entry, has a value greater than zero and less than the UE implementation-specific maximum value, the UE shall remove the SNPN identity corresponding to the SNPN from the "permanently forbidden SNPNs" list for 3GPP access or "temporarily forbidden SNPNs" list for 3GPP access, associated with the entry; and

- if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder and the SNPN-specific attempt counter for non-3GPP access for an SNPN in the "permanently forbidden SNPNs" list for non-3GPP access or "temporarily forbidden SNPNs" list for non-3GPP access associated with the entry, has a value greater than zero and less than the UE implementation-specific maximum value, the UE shall remove the SNPN identity corresponding to the SNPN from the "permanently forbidden SNPNs" list for non-3GPP access or "temporarily forbidden SNPNs" list for non-3GPP access, associated with the entry.

5.3.21 CIoT 5GS optimizations

 CIoT 5GS optimizations provide improved support of small data and SMS transfer. A UE supporting CIoT 5GS optimizations can indicate the 5GS CIoT network behaviour the UE can support and prefers to use during the registration procedure (see 3GPPTS23.502[9]). The UE may indicate the support for control plane CIoT 5GS optimization, user plane CIoT 5GS optimization, N3 data transfer and header compression (see subclause9.11.3.1). Furthermore, the UE may, separately from the indication of support, indicate preference for control plane CIoT 5GS optimization or user plane CIoT 5GS optimization (see subclause9.11.3.9A). The indication of preference is also considered as the request to use. A UE supporting CIoT EPS optimizations can also indicate the EPS CIoT network behaviour the UE can support during the registration procedure. Furthermore, the UE may, separately from the indication of support, indicate preference for control plane CIoT EPS optimization or user plane CIoT EPS optimization.

NOTE1: CIoT 5GS optimizations are not supported by NR connected to 5GCN.

NOTE2: If the UE does not support user plane CIoT 5GS optimization, it does not indicate preference for user plane CIoT 5GS optimization.

The UE can be in NB-N1 mode or WB-N1 mode when requesting the use of CIoT 5GS optimizations during the registration procedure. A UE in NB-N1 mode always indicates support for control plane CIoT 5GS optimization.

In NB-N1 mode, the UE, when requesting the use of CIoT 5GS optimizations, does not:

- request an initial registration for emergency services;

- request a PDU session establishment for emergency PDU session; or

- indicate UE's usage setting during the registration procedure.

The network does not indicate to the UE support of emergency services when the UE is in NB-N1 mode (see subclause5.5.1.2.4 and 5.5.1.3.4).

The control plane CIoT 5GS optimization enables support of efficient transport of user data (IP, Ethernet and Unstructured) or SMS messages over control plane via the AMF without triggering user-plane resources establishment. The support of control plane CIoT 5GS optimization is mandatory for the network in NB-N1 mode and optional in WB-N1 mode. Optional header compression of IP data and Ethernet data can be applied to PDU sessions with IP PDU session type and Ethernet PDU session type that are configured to support header compression. For IP header compression, Robust Header Compression (ROHC) protocol specified in IETFRFC5795[39B] is used. For Ethernet header compression, Ethernet Header Compression (EHC) protocol specified in 3GPP TS 38.323 [29] is used.

For a UE that supports Location Services (LCS) notification mechanisms in N1 mode, the control plane CIoT 5GS optimization also enables the transport of location services messages from 5GMM-IDLE mode using the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message when location services are requested (see subclause6.7.1 in 3GPPTS23.273[6B]).

The user plane CIoT 5GS optimization enables support for change from 5GMM-IDLE mode over 3GPP access to 5GMM-CONNECTED mode over 3GPP access without the need for using the service request procedure (see subclause5.3.1.5).

If the UE supports user plane CIoT 5GS optimization, it shall also support N3 data transfer.

If the UE indicates support of one or more CIoT 5GS optimizations and the network supports one or more CIoT 5GS optimizations and decides to accept the registration request, the network indicates the supported CIoT 5GS optimizations to the UE per registration area when accepting the UE request. Network indication of support is interpreted by the UE as the acceptance to use the respective feature. After completion of the registration procedure, the UE and the network can then use the accepted CIoT 5GS optimizations for the transfer of user data (IP, Ethernet, Unstructured and SMS).

A UE in NB-N1 mode or WB-N1 mode can request the use of SMS over NAS by setting the SMS requested bit of the 5GS update type IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message as specified in subclauses 5.5.1.2.2 and 5.5.1.3.2.

The AMF indicates whether it allows the use of SMS over NAS for a UE in NB-N1 mode or WB-N1 mode by setting the SMS allowed bit of the 5GS registration result IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message as specified in subclauses5.5.1.2.4 and 5.5.1.3.4.

If the UE and the network support both the control plane CIoT 5GS optimization and N3 data transfer, then when receiving the UE's request for a PDU session establishment, the AMF decides whether the PDU session should be NEF PDU session or N6 PDU session as specified in 3GPPTS23.501[8] and then:

a) if NEF PDU session is to be established for unstructured data type, the AMF includes control plane only indication for the requested PDU session to the SMF;

b) if N6 PDU session is to be established and the DNN or S-NSSAI of the newly requested N6 PDU session supports interworking with EPS as specified in TS23.502[9]:

1) if there are existing N6 PDU sessions supporting interworking with EPS for this UE that were established with the control plane only indication, the AMF includes the control plane only indication for the newly requested N6 PDU session to the SMF; or

2) if there are existing N6 PDU sessions supporting interworking with EPS for this UE that were established without the control plane only indication, the AMF does not include the control plane only indication for the newly requested N6 PDU session to the SMF;

3) if there is no existing N6 PDU session supporting interworking with EPS for this UE, the AMF determines whether to include the control plane only indication for the newly requested N6 PDU session to the SMF based on local policies, the UE's preferred CIoT network behaviour and the supported CIoT network behaviour; and

c) if N6 PDU session is to be established and the DNN or S-NSSAI of the N6 PDU session does not support interworking with EPS as specified in TS23.502[9], the AMF determines whether to include the control plane only indication for the newly requested N6 PDU session to the SMF based on local policies, the UE's preferred CIoT network behaviour and the supported CIoT network behaviour.

In NB-N1 mode, if the UE or the network does not support N3 data transfer, then when receiving the UE's request for a PDU session establishment, the AMF decides whether the PDU session should be NEF PDU session or N6 PDU session as specified in 3GPPTS23.501[8] and then includes the control plane only indication for the requested PDU session to the SMF.

If the network supports user plane CIoT 5GS optimization, it shall also support N3 data transfer.

Broadcast system information may provide information about support of CIoT 5GS optimizations (see 3GPPTS36.331[25A]). At reception of new broadcast system information, the lower layers deliver it to the 5GMM layer in the UE. The information provided by lower layers is per PLMN and used by the UE to determine whether certain CIoT 5GS optimizations are supported in the cell.

The UE shall not attempt to use CIoT 5GS optimizations which are indicated as not supported.

In NB-N1 mode, at any given time, there cannot be user-plane resources established for a number of PDU sessions that exceeds the UE' s maximum number of supported user-plane resources. The UE in NB-N1 mode shall not:

a) request the establishment of user-plane resources for a number of PDU sessions that exceeds the UE' s maximum number of supported user-plane resources; or

b) initiate the establishment of a new PDU session, or request the transfer of a PDU session from the non-3GPP access to the 3GPP access, if:

1) the UE has indicated preference for user plane CIoT 5GS optimization;

2) the network accepted the use of user plane CIoT 5GS optimization; and

3) the UE currently has user-plane resources established fora number of PDU sessions that is equal to the UE' s maximum number of supported user-plane resources.

The AMF enforces a limit on the number of PDU sessions with active user-plane resources for a UE in NB-N1 mode based on the UE's maximum number of supported user-plane resources as follows:

a) there can be a maximum of one PDU session with active user-plane resources when the Multiple user-plane resources support bit is set to "Multiple user-plane resources not supported", or

b) there can be a maximum of two PDU sessions with active user-plane resources when the Multiple user-plane resources support bit is set to "Multiple user-plane resources supported".

A PDU session for a UE in NB-N1 mode shall only have one QoS rule and that is the default QoS rule. Reflective QoS is not supported in NB-N1 mode. Reflective QoS is not applicable for a PDU session with control plane only indication.

In NB-N1 mode, when the UE requests the lower layer to establish a RRC connection and the UE requests the use of user plane CIoT 5GS optimization, the UE shall pass an indication of the requested CIoT 5GS optimizations to the lower layers. If the UE requests the use of N3 data transfer without user plane CIoT 5GS optimization, then the UE shall also pass an indication of user plane CIoT 5GS optimization to lower layers.

In WB-N1 mode, when the UE requests the lower layer to establish a RRC connection and the UE requests the use of control plane CIoT 5GS optimization or user plane CIoT 5GS optimization, the UE shall pass an indication of the requested CIoT 5GS optimizations to the lower layers.

5.3.22 Interaction between MICO mode with active time and extended idle mode DRX cycle

The UE can request the use of both MICO mode with active time and eDRX during a registration procedure but it is up to the network to decide to enable none, one of them or both (see 3GPPTS23.501[8]).

If the network accepts the use of both MICO mode with active time (see subclause5.3.6) and eDRX (see subclause5.3.16), the extended DRX parameters provided to the UE should allow for multiple paging occasions before the active timer expires.

5.3.23 Forbidden wireline access area

The AMF shall send a REGISTRATION REJECT, SERVICE REJECT or DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message over a wireline access network with the 5GMM cause #77 "wireline access area not allowed", if conditions specified in 3GPPTS23.316[6D] for AMF's enforcement of forbidden area are fulfilled.

If a REGISTRATION REJECT, SERVICE REJECT or DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message is received over a wireline access network with the 5GMM cause #77 "wireline access area not allowed":

a) the 5G-RG shall not access 5GCN over the wireline access network until the 5G-RG is switched off, the UICC containing the USIM is removed, or the 5G-RG starts using another wireline access network;

b) the W-AGF acting on behalf of the FN-CRG shall not access 5GCN until the W-AGF acting on behalf of the FN-CRG determines that the FN-CRG is switched off; and

c) the W-AGF acting on behalf of the N5GC device shall not access 5GCN until the W-AGF acting on behalf of the FN-CRG determines that the FN-CRG serving the N5GC device is switched off.

5.3.24 WUS assistance

A UE supporting reception of WUS assistance information indicates its capability for reception of WUS assistance information during registration procedure (see 3GPPTS23.501[8]). The UE supporting WUS assistance information may include its UE paging probability information in the Requested WUS assistance information IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message (see 3GPPTS23.501[8]). The UE shall not include its UE paging probability information during a registration procedure when the UE has an active emergency PDU session.

The UE and the network may negotiate the UE paging probability information during a registration procedure when the UE does not have an emergency PDU session. The UE paging probability information is an assistance information used to determine the WUS group for paging UE (see 3GPPTS23.501[8], 3GPPTS36.300[25B]).

NOTE: The determination of UE paging probability information is up to UE implementation.

If a UE supporting WUS assistance information did not receive the Negotiated WUS assistance information IE during the last registration procedure due to an active emergency PDU session over 3GPP access, the UE shall initiate a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update to request WUS assistance information after the emergency PDU session is released over 3GPP access.

If the UE does not have an emergency PDU session and the network accepts the use of the WUS assistance information for the UE, the network determines the negotiated UE paging probability information for the UE based on the requested UE paging probability information, if any, local configuration or previous statistical information for the UE, and then indicates the negotiated UE paging probability information in the Negotiated WUS assistance information IE to the UE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. The network shall store the negotiated UE paging probability information in the 5GMM context of the UE for paging.

The UE shall use WUS assistance information only if the UE received the Negotiated WUS assistance information IE during the last registration procedure. If the UE did not receive the Negotiated WUS assistance information IE during the last registration procedure, the UE shall not use WUS assistance.

If the network did not accept the request to use WUS assistance information, the network shall delete the stored negotiated UE paging probability information for the UE, if available.

When an emergency PDU session is successfully established after the UE received the Negotiated WUS assistance information IE during the last registration procedure, the UE and the AMF shall not use WUS assistance information until:

- the successful completion of the PDU session release procedure of the emergency PDU session;

- the UE receives WUS assistance information during a registration procedure with PDU session status IE or upon successful completion of a service request procedure, if the UE or the network locally releases the emergency PDU session; or

- the successful completion of the handover of the emergency PDU session to non-3GPP access.

5.3.25 Paging Early Indication with Paging Subgrouping Assistance

A UE may indicate its capability to support NR paging subgrouping during registration procedure when the UE:

- initiates a registration procedure with 5GS registration type IE not set to "emergency registration"; and

- does not have an active emergency PDU session.

If a UE supporting NR paging subgrouping did not indicate its capability to support NR paging subgrouping during the last registration procedure due to an active emergency PDU session over 3GPP access, the UE shall initiate a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update procedure to indicate its capability to support NR paging subgrouping after the emergency PDU session is released over 3GPP access.

If the UE indicates support of NR paging subgrouping the UE may include its paging probability information in the Requested PEIPS assistance information IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message. If the UE indicates support of NR paging subgrouping and the network supports and accepts the use of the PEIPS assistance information for the UE, the network provides to the UE the Negotiated PEIPS assistance information, including the Paging subgroup ID, in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message or the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message. The Paging subgroup ID is used to determine the NR paging subgroup for paging the UE. The network shall store the Paging subgroup ID in the 5GMM context of the UE.

The UE shall use PEIPS assistance information only if the UE received the Negotiated PEIPS assistance information IE during the last registration procedure. If the UE did not receive the Negotiated PEIPS assistance information IE during the last registration procedure, the UE shall delete any existing PEIPS assistance information received from the network.

If the network did not accept the request to use PEIPS assistance information during the registration procedure, the network shall delete the stored PEIPS assistance information for the UE, if available.

If the UE supports the use of the PEIPS assistance information and the network supports and accepts the use of the PEIPS assistance information, the network may provide the PEIPS assistance information to the UE by including the Updated PEIPS assistance information IE in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message. 

When an emergency PDU session is successfully established over 3GPP access after the UE received the Negotiated PEIPS assistance information IE during the last registration procedure, the UE and the AMF shall not use PEIPS assistance information until:

- the successful completion of the PDU session release procedure of the emergency PDU;

- the UE receives PEIPS assistance information during a registration procedure with PDU session status IE or upon successful completion of a service request procedure, if the UE or the network locally releases the emergency PDU session;

- the successful completion of handover of emergency PDU session to non-3GPP access; or

- the successful transfer of the emergency PDU session in 5GS to the EPS or ePDG connected to EPC.

5.4 5GMM common procedures

5.4.1 Primary authentication and key agreement procedure

5.4.1.1 General

The purpose of the primary authentication and key agreement procedure is to enable mutual authentication between the UE and the network and to provide keying material that can be used between the UE and network in subsequent security procedures, as specified in 3GPPTS33.501[24].

Two methods are defined:

a) EAP based primary authentication and key agreement procedure.

b) 5G AKA based primary authentication and key agreement procedure.

The UE and the AMF shall support the EAP based primary authentication and key agreement procedure and the 5G AKA based primary authentication and key agreement procedure.

5.4.1.2 EAP based primary authentication and key agreement procedure

5.4.1.2.1 General

The purpose of the EAP based primary authentication and key agreement procedure is to provide mutual authentication between the UE and the network and to agree on the keys KAUSF, KSEAF and KAMF (see 3GPPTS33.501[24]).

Extensible authentication protocol (EAP) as specified in IETFRFC3748[34] enables authentication using various EAP methods.

EAP defines four types of EAP messages:

a) an EAP-request message;

b) an EAP-response message;

c) an EAP-success message; and

d) an EAP-failure message.

Several rounds of exchanges of an EAP-request message and a related EAP-response message can be required to achieve the authentication (see example in figure5.4.1.2.1.1).

The EAP based primary authentication and key agreement procedure is always initiated and controlled by the network.

The EAP-request message, the ngKSI and the ABBA are transported from the network to the UE using the AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message of the EAP message reliable transport procedure.

The EAP-response message is transported from the UE to the network using the AUTHENTICATION RESPONSE message of the EAP message reliable transport procedure.

If the authentication of the UE completes successfully, the serving AMF intends to initiate a security mode control procedure after the EAP based primary authentication and key agreement procedure and the security mode control procedure intends to bring into use the partial native 5G NAS security context created by the EAP based primary authentication and key agreement procedure, then the EAP-success message and the ngKSI are transported from the network to the UE using the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message of the security mode control procedure (see subclause5.4.2).

If the authentication of the UE completes successfully and the serving AMF does not intend to initiate a security mode control procedure bringing into use the partial native 5G NAS security context created by the EAP based primary authentication and key agreement procedure, then the EAP-success message, and the ngKSI are transported from the network to the UE using the AUTHENTICATION RESULT message of the EAP result message transport procedure.

NOTE1: The serving AMF will not initiate a security mode control procedure after the EAP based primary authentication and key agreement procedure e.g. in case of AMF relocation during registration procedure.

If the authentication of the UE completes unsuccessfully, the EAP-failure message is transported from the network to the UE using the AUTHENTICATION RESULT message or the AUTHENTICATION REJECT message of the EAP result message transport procedure or in a response of the initial 5GMM procedure as part of which the EAP based primary authentication and key agreement procedure is performed.

The AMF shall set the authenticator retransmission timer specified in IETFRFC3748[34] subclause4.3 to infinite value.

NOTE2: The EAP message reliable transport procedure provides a reliable transport of EAP messages and therefore retransmissions at the EAP layer do not occur.

The AUSF and the AMF support exchange of EAP messages using N12.

The UE shall detect and handle any duplication of EAP message as specified in IETFRFC3748[34].



Figure5.4.1.2.1.1: EAP based primary authentication and key agreement procedure

5.4.1.2.2 EAP-AKA' related procedures

5.4.1.2.2.1 General

The UE shall support acting as EAP-AKA' peer as specified in IETFRFC5448[40]. The AUSF may support acting as EAP-AKA' server as specified in IETFRFC5448[40]. The AAA server of the Credentials Holder (CH) or the Default Credentials Server (DCS) may support acting as EAP-AKA' server as specified in IETFRFC5448[40].

The EAP-AKA' enables mutual authentication of the UE and the network.

The UE can reject the EAP-request/AKA'-challenge message sent by the network. The UE shall proceed with an EAP-request/AKA'-challenge message only if a USIM is present.

During a successful EAP based primary authentication and key agreement procedure, the CK and IK are computed by the USIM. CK and IK are then used by the ME as key material to generate an EMSK or MSK.

5.4.1.2.2.2 Initiation

In order to initiate the EAP based primary authentication and key agreement procedure using EAP-AKA', the AUSF or the AAA server of the CH or the DCS shall send an EAP-request/AKA'-challenge message as specified in IETFRFC5448[40]. The AUSF or the AAA server of the CH or the DCS shall set the AT_KDF_INPUT attribute of the EAP-request/AKA'-challenge message to the SNN. The SNN is in format described in subclause9.12.1. The AUSF or the AAA server of the CH or the DCS may include AT_RESULT_IND attribute in the EAP-request/AKA'-challenge message.

The network shall select an ngKSI value. If an ngKSI is contained in an initial NAS message during a 5GMM procedure, the network shall select a different ngKSI value. The network shall send the selected ngKSI value to the UE along with each EAP message. The network shall send the ABBA value as described in subclause9.11.3.10 to the UE along with the EAP request message and EAP-success message.

Upon receiving an EAP-request/AKA'-challenge message, the UE shall check whether the UE has a USIM, shall check the key derivation function indicated in AT_KDF attributes as specified in IETFRFC5448[40], and if the value of the Key derivation function field within the received AT_KDF attribute, is of value 1, shall check:

a) whether the network name field of the AT_KDF_INPUT attribute is the SNN constructed according to subclause9.12.1; and

b) whether the network name field of the AT_KDF_INPUT attribute matches the PLMN identity or the SNPN identity of the selected SNPN saved in the UE.

When not operating in SNPN access operation mode, the PLMN identity the UE uses for the above network name check is as follows:

a) when the UE moves from 5GMM-IDLE mode to 5GMM-CONNECTED mode, until the first handover, the UE shall use the PLMN identity of the selected PLMN; and

b) after handover or inter-system change to N1 mode in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode:

1) if the target cell is not a shared network cell, the UE shall use the PLMN identity received as part of the broadcast system information;

2) if the target cell is a shared network cell and the UE has a valid 5G-GUTI, the UE shall use the PLMN identity that is part of the 5G-GUTI; and

3) if the target cell is a shared network cell and the UE has a valid 4G-GUTI, but not a valid 5G-GUTI, the UE shall use the PLMN identity that is part of the 4G-GUTI.

When operating in SNPN access operation mode, the SNPN identity the UE uses for the above network name check is the SNPN identity of the selected SNPN.

5.4.1.2.2.3 UE successfully authenticates network

If a USIM is present and the SNN check is successful, the UE shall handle the EAP-request/AKA'-challenge message as specified in IETFRFC5448[40]. The USIM shall derive CK and IK and compute the authentication response (RES) using the 5G authentication challenge data received from the ME, and pass RES to the ME. The ME shall derive CK' and IK' from CK and IK, and if the UE operates in SNPN access operation mode and the credentials in the USIM contain an indication to use MSK for derivation of KAUSF after success of primary authentication and key agreement procedure then derive MSK from CK' and IK' otherwise derive EMSK from CK' and IK'.

Editors Note [WI: eNPN, CR#4412]: The indication to use MSK requires extension of the related elementary file in USIM subject to CT6 agreement. 

Furthermore, if the UE operates in SNPN access operation mode and the credentials in the USIM

contain an indication to use MSK for derivation of KAUSF after success of primary authentication and key agreement procedure then the ME may generate a new KAUSF from the MSK otherwise the ME may generate a new KAUSF from the EMSK.

If the ME generates a new KAUSF, the ME shall generate a new KSEAF from the new KAUSF, and the KAMF from the ABBA received together with the EAP-request/AKA'-challenge message, and the new KSEAF as described in 3GPPTS33.501[24], and create a partial native 5G NAS security context identified by the ngKSI value received together with the EAP-request/AKA'-challenge message in subclause5.4.1.2.4.2 in the volatile memory of the ME. If the KAMF and the partial native 5G NAS security context are created, the ME shall store the KAMF in the created partial native 5G NAS security context, and shall send an EAP-response/AKA'-challenge message as specified in IETFRFC5448[40].

NOTE: Generation of the new KAUSF and the new KSEAF does not result into deletion of the valid KAUSF and the valid KSEAF, if any.

The ME shall not use the new KAUSF in the verification of SOR transparent container and UE parameters update transparent container, if any are received, until receipt of an EAP-success message.

If the EAP-request/AKA'-challenge message contains AT_RESULT_IND attribute, the UE may include AT_RESULT_IND attribute in the EAP-response/AKA'-challenge message as specified in IETFRFC5448[40].

5.4.1.2.2.4 Errors when handling EAP-request/AKA'-challenge message

If a USIM is present, the SNN check fails or the UE does not accept AUTN during handling of the EAP-request/AKA'-challenge message as specified in IETFRFC5448[40], the UE shall send an EAP-response/AKA'-authentication-reject message as specified in IETFRFC5448[40].

If a USIM is present, the SNN check is successful but the UE detects that the sequence number in AUTN is not correct during handling of the EAP-request/AKA'-challenge message as specified in IETFRFC5448[40], the UE shall send an EAP-response/AKA'-synchronization-failure message as specified in IETFRFC5448[40].

If a USIM is present, the SNN check is successful, the sequence number in AUTN is correct and the UE detects another error during handling of the EAP-request/AKA'-challenge message as specified in IETFRFC5448[40], the UE shall send an EAP-response/AKA'-client-error message as specified in IETFRFC5448[40].

If a USIM is not present, the UE shall send an EAP-response/AKA'-client-error message as specified in IETFRFC5448[40].

For any of the above, the UE shall start timer T3520 when the AUTHENTICATION RESPONSE message containing the EAP-response message is sent. Furthermore, the UE shall stop any of the timers T3510, T3517 or T3521 (if they were running). Upon receiving an AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message with the EAP message IE containing an EAP-request/AKA'-challenge from the network, the UE shall stop timer T3520, if running, and then process the EAP-request/AKA'-challenge information as normal.

5.4.1.2.2.5 Network successfully authenticates UE

Upon reception of the EAP-response/AKA'-challenge message, if procedures for handling an EAP-response/AKA'-challenge message as specified in IETFRFC5448[40] are successful and:

a) the AUSF acts as the EAP-AKA' server, the AUSF shall generate EMSK, the KAUSF from the EMSK, and the KSEAF from the KAUSF as described in 3GPPTS33.501[24]; or

b) the AAA server of the CH or the DCS acts as the EAP-AKA' server, the AAA server of the CH or the DCS shall generate MSK as described in 3GPPTS33.501[24];

and:

a) if the AUSF or the AAA server of the CH or the DCS included the AT_RESULT_IND attribute in the EAP-request/AKA'-challenge message and the AT_RESULT_IND attribute is included in the corresponding EAP-response/AKA'-challenge message, the AUSF or the AAA server of the CH or the DCS shall send an EAP-request/AKA'-notification message as specified in IETFRFC5448[40]; or

b) if the AUSF or the AAA server of the CH or the DCS:

1) included the AT_RESULT_IND attribute in the EAP-request/AKA'-challenge message and the AT_RESULT_IND attribute is not included in the EAP-response/AKA'-challenge message; or

2) did not include the AT_RESULT_IND attribute in the EAP-request/AKA'-challenge message;

 then the AUSF or the AAA server of the CH or the DCS shall send an EAP-success message as specified in IETFRFC5448[40] and shall consider the procedure complete.

NOTE1: When the AAA server of the CH or the DCS acts as the EAP-AKA' server, the AAA server of the CH or the DCS provides (via the NSSAAF) the MSK and the SUPI to the AUSF. Upon reception of the MSK, the AUSF generates the KAUSF from the MSK, and the KSEAF from the KAUSF as described in 3GPPTS33.501[24].

NOTE2: The AUSF provides the KSEAF and optionally the SUPI (unless the SEAF provided the AUSF with the SUPI before) to the SEAF as described in 3GPPTS33.501[24]. Upon reception of the KSEAF and optionally the SUPI, the SEAF generates the KAMF based on the ABBA, the KSEAF and the SUPI as described in 3GPPTS33.501[24] and provides ngKSI and the KAMF to the AMF. Upon reception of the ngKSI and the KAMF, the AMF creates a partial native 5G NAS security context identified by the ngKSI and stores the KAMF in the created partial native 5G NAS security context.

5.4.1.2.2.6 UE handling EAP-AKA' notification message

Upon receiving an EAP-request/AKA'-notification message, the UE shall send an EAP-response/AKA'-notification message as specified in IETFRFC5448[40].

5.4.1.2.2.6A EAP based Identification initiation by the network

If the AUSF or the AAA server of the CH or the DCS decides to initiate the EAP based identification procedure, the AUSF or the AAA server of the CH or the DCS shall send an EAP-Request/Identity or EAP-Request/AKA'-Identity message as specified in IETFRFC5448[40].

The AMF shall encapsulate the EAP-Request/Identity or EAP-Request/AKA'-Identity message in the AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message and send it to the UE.

5.4.1.2.2.6B EAP based Identification response by the UE

Upon receipt of the AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message with EAP-Request/Identity message the UE shall send an AUTHENTICATION RESPONSE message with EAP-Response/Identity to the network. In the EAP-Response/Identity message, the UE shall provide the requested identity according to 3GPPTS33.501[24] annexF.2, in the UE identity in the EAP-Response/Identity message as specified in IETFRFC5448[40].

Upon receipt of the AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message with EAP-Request/AKA'-Identity message the UE shall send an AUTHENTICATION RESPONSE message with EAP-Response/AKA'-Identity to the network. Based on the attribute received in the EAP-Request/AKA'-Identity, the UE shall provide the requested identity according to 3GPPTS33.501[24] annexF.2, in the EAP-Response/AKA'-Identity message, as specified in IETFRFC5448[40].

If the EAP-Request/AKA'-Identity carries the AT_PERMANENT_REQ, the UE shall respond with EAP-Response/AKA'-Client-Error with the error code "unable to process packet".

5.4.1.2.2.7 Network sending EAP-success message

Upon reception of the EAP-response/AKA'-notification message, if earlier procedures for handling an EAP-request/AKA'-challenge message as specified in IETFRFC5448[40] were successful, the AUSF or the AAA server of the CH or the DCS shall send an EAP-success message as specified in IETFRFC5448[40] and shall consider the procedure complete.

NOTE: The AUSF provides the KSEAF to the SEAF. Upon reception of the KSEAF, the SEAF generates the KAMF based on the ABBA and the KSEAF as described in 3GPPTS33.501[24], and provides ngKSI and the KAMF to the AMF. Upon reception of the ngKSI and the KAMF, the AMF creates a partial native 5G NAS security context identified by the ngKSI, and stores the KAMF in the created partial native 5G NAS security context.

5.4.1.2.2.8 UE handling EAP-success message

Upon receiving an EAP-success message, the ME shall:

a) delete the valid KAUSF and the valid KSEAF, if any;

b) if the ME has not generated a new KAUSF and a new KSEAF and has not created a partial native 5G NAS security context as described in subclause5.4.1.2.2.3:

1) if the UE operates in SNPN access operation mode and the credentials in the USIM

contain an indication to use MSK for derivation of KAUSF after success of primary authentication and key agreement procedure then generate a new KAUSF from the MSK otherwise generate a new KAUSF from the EMSK;

Editors Note [WI: eNPN, CR#4412]: The indication to use MSK requires extension of the related elementary file in USIM subject to CT6 agreement. 

2) generate a new KSEAF from the new KAUSF, and the KAMF from the ABBA that was received with the EAP-success message, and the new KSEAF as described in 3GPPTS33.501[24];

3) create a partial native 5G NAS security context identified by the ngKSI value in the volatile memory of the ME; and

4) store the KAMF in the created partial native 5G NAS security context; and

c) consider the new KAUSF to be the valid KAUSF, and the new KSEAF to be the valid KSEAF, reset the SOR counter and the UE parameter update counter to zero, and store the valid KAUSF, the valid KSEAF, the SOR counter and the UE parameter update counter as specified in annexC, and use the valid KAUSF in the verification of SOR transparent container and UE parameters update transparent container, if any are received.

The UE shall consider the procedure complete.

5.4.1.2.2.9 Network not successfully authenticates UE

Upon reception of the EAP-response/AKA'-challenge message, if procedures for handling an EAP-response/AKA'-challenge message as specified in IETFRFC5448[40] are not successful, the AUSF or the AAA server of the CH or the DCS shall send an EAP-request/AKA'-notification message that implies failure as specified in IETFRFC5448[40].

5.4.1.2.2.10 Network sending EAP-failure message

Upon reception of the EAP-response/AKA'-notification message, if earlier procedures for handling an EAP-request/AKA'-challenge message as specified in IETFRFC5448[40] were not successful, the AUSF or the AAA server of the CH or the DCS shall send an EAP-failure message as specified in IETFRFC5448[40] and shall consider the procedure complete.

If the authentication response (RES) returned by the UE in the AT_RES attribute of the EAP-response/AKA'-challenge message is not valid, the network handling depends upon the type of identity used by the UE in the initial NAS message, that is:

- if the 5G-GUTI was used; or

- if the SUCI was used.

If the 5G-GUTI was used, the network should transport the EAP-failure message in the AUTHENTICATION RESULT message of the EAP result message transport procedure, initiate an identification procedure to retrieve SUCI from the UE and restart the EAP based primary authentication and key agreement procedure with the received SUCI.

If the SUCI was used for identification in the initial NAS message or in a restarted EAP based primary authentication and key agreement procedure, or the network decides not to initiate the identification procedure to retrieve SUCI from the UE after an unsuccessful EAP based primary authentication and key agreement procedure, the network should transport the EAP-failure message in an AUTHENTICATION REJECT message of the EAP result message transport procedure.

Depending on local requirements or operator preference for emergency services, if the UE initiates a registration procedure with 5GS registration type IE set to "emergency registration" and the AMF is configured to allow emergency registration without user identity, the AMF needs not follow the procedures specified for transporting the EAP-failure message in the AUTHENTICATION REJECT message of the EAP result message transport procedure in the present subclause. The AMF may include the EAP-failure message in a response of the current 5GMM specific procedure or in the AUTHENTICATION RESULT of the EAP result message transport procedure.

5.4.1.2.2.11 UE handling EAP-failure message

Upon receiving an EAP-failure message, the UE shall delete the partial native 5G NAS security context and shall delete the new KAUSF and the new KSEAF, if any were created as described in subclause5.4.1.2.2.3.

The UE shall consider the procedure complete.

If the EAP-failure message is received in an AUTHENTICATION REJECT message:

1) if the AUTHENTICATION REJECT message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS:

- the UE shall set the update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED, delete the stored 5G-GUTI, TAI list, last visited registered TAI and ngKSI;

 In case of PLMN, the USIM shall be considered invalid until switching off the UE or the UICC containing the USIM is removed.

 In case of SNPN, if the UE is neither registered for onboarding services in SNPN nor performing initial registration for onboarding services in SNPN and the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the entry of the "list of subscriber data" with the SNPN identity of the current SNPN shall be considered invalid until the UE is switched off or the entry is updated. Additionally, the UE shall consider the USIM as invalid for the current SNPN until switching off or the UICC containing the USIM is removed.

 In case of SNPN, if the UE is neither registered for onboarding services in SNPN nor performing initial registration for onboarding services in SNPN and the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the UE shall consider the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" as invalid until the UE is switched off or the entry is updated. Additionally, the UE shall consider the USIM as invalid for the entry until switching off or the UICC containing the USIM is removed.

 If the UE is registered for onboarding services in SNPN or is performing initial registration for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall store the SNPN identity in the "permanently forbidden SNPNs" list for onboarding services, enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH, and perform an SNPN selection or an SNPN selection for onboarding services according to 3GPPTS23.122[5];

- if the UE is neither registered for onboarding services in SNPN nor performing initial registration for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall set:

i) the counter for "SIM/USIM considered invalid for GPRS services" events, the counter for "USIM considered invalid for 5GS services over non-3GPP access" events, and the counter for "SIM/USIM considered invalid for non-GPRS services" events if maintained by the UE, in case of PLMN; or

ii) the counter for "the entry for the current SNPN considered invalid for 3GPP access" events and the counter for "the entry for the current SNPN considered invalid for non-3GPP access" events in case of SNPN;

 to UE implementation-specific maximum value.

 If the UE is registered for onboarding services in SNPN or performing initial registration for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall set the SNPN-specific attempt counter for the current SNPN to the UE implementation-specific maximum value; and

- if the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall handle EMM parameters, 4G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and eKSI as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] for the case when the authentication procedure is not accepted by the network. The USIM shall be considered as invalid also for non-EPS services until switching off or the UICC containing the USIM is removed; and

2) if the AUTHENTICATION REJECT message is received without integrity protection, the UE shall start timer T3247 with a random value uniformly drawn from the range between 30 minutes and 60 minutes, if the timer is not running (see subclause5.3.20). 

 Additionally, if the UE is neither registered for onboarding services in SNPN nor performing initial registration for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall:

a) if the AUTHENTICATION REJECT message is received over 3GPP access, and the counter for "SIM/USIM considered invalid for GPRS services" events in case of PLMN or the counter for "the entry for the current SNPN considered invalid for 3GPP access" events in case of SNPN has a value less than a UE implementation-specific maximum value, proceed as specified in subclause5.3.20, list item 1)-a) of subclause5.3.20.2 (if the UE is not operating in SNPN access operation mode) or list item a)-1) of subclause5.3.20.3 (if the UE is operating in SNPN access operation mode) for the case that the 5GMM cause value received is #3;

b) if the AUTHENTICATION REJECT message is received over non-3GPP access, and the counter for "USIM considered invalid for 5GS services over non-3GPP access" events in case of PLMN or the counter for "the entry for the current SNPN considered invalid for non-3GPP access" events in case of SNPN has a value less than a UE implementation-specific maximum value, proceed as specified in subclause5.3.20, list item 1)-b) of subclause5.3.20.2 (if the UE is not operating in SNPN access operation mode) or list item a)-2) of subclause5.3.20.3 (if the UE is operating in SNPN access operation mode) for the case that the 5GMM cause value received is #3;

c) otherwise:

i) if the AUTHENTICATION REJECT message is received over 3GPP access:

- The UE shall set the update status for 3GPP access to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED, delete for 3GPP access only the stored 5G-GUTI, TAI list, last visited registered TAI and ngKSI.

- In case of PLMN, the UE shall consider the USIM as invalid for 5GS services via 3GPP access and invalid for non-EPS service until switching off the UE or the UICC containing the USIM is removed.

 In case of SNPN, if the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the UE shall consider the entry of the "list of subscriber data" with the SNPN identity of the current SNPN as invalid for 3GPP access until the UE is switched off or the entry is updated. Additionally, the UE shall consider the USIM as invalid for the current SNPN via 3GPP access until switching off or the UICC containing the USIM is removed.

 In case of SNPN, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the UE shall consider the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" as invalid for 3GPP access until the UE is switched off or the entry is updated. Additionally, the UE shall consider the USIM as invalid for the entry via 3GPP access until switching off or the UICC containing the USIM is removed.

- The UE shall set:

- the counter for "SIM/USIM considered invalid for GPRS services" events and the counter for "SIM/USIM considered invalid for non-GPRS services" events if maintained by the UE, in case of PLMN; or

- the counter for "the entry for the current SNPN considered invalid for 3GPP access" events in case of SNPN;

 to UE implementation-specific maximum value.

- If the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall handle 4G-GUTI, TAI list and eKSI as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] for the case when the authentication procedure is not accepted by the network. The USIM shall be considered as invalid also for non-EPS services until switching off or the UICC containing the USIM is removed; and

ii) if the AUTHENTICATION REJECT message is received over non-3GPP access:

- the UE shall set the update status for non-3GPP access to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED, delete for non-3GPP access only the stored 5G-GUTI, TAI list, last visited registered TAI and ngKSI;

- in case of PLMN, the UE shall consider the USIM as invalid for 5GS services via non-3GPP access until switching off the UE or the UICC containing the USIM is removed.

 In case of SNPN, the UE shall consider the entry of the "list of subscriber data" with the SNPN identity of the current SNPN as invalid for non-3GPP access until the UE is switched off or the entry is updated. Additionally, the UE shall consider the USIM as invalid for the current SNPN and for non-3GPP access until switching off or the UICC containing the USIM is removed; and

- the UE shall set:

- the counter for "USIM considered invalid for 5GS services over non-3GPP access" events to UE implementation-specific maximum value in case of PLMN; or

- the counter for "the entry for the current SNPN considered invalid for non-3GPP access" events to UE implementation-specific maximum value in case of SNPN.

 If the UE is registered for onboarding services in SNPN or performing initial registration for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall:

a) if the SNPN-specific attempt counter for the SNPN sending the AUTHENTICATION REJECT message has a value less than a UE implementation-specific maximum value, increment the SNPN-specific attempt counter for the SNPN; or

b) otherwise, the UE shall set the update status to 5U3.ROAMING NOT ALLOWED, delete the stored 5G-GUTI, TAI list, last visited registered TAI, and ngKSI, store the SNPN identity in the "permanently forbidden SNPNs" list for onboarding services, enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH, and perform an SNPN selection or an SNPN selection for onboarding services according to 3GPPTS23.122[5].

If the AUTHENTICATION REJECT message is received by the UE, the UE shall abort any 5GMM signalling procedure, stop any of the timers T3510, T3517, T3519 or T3521 (if they were running), enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED and delete any stored SUCI.

5.4.1.2.2.12 Abnormal cases in the UE

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a) EAP-request/AKA'-challenge message with the key derivation function indicated in AT_KDF attributes set to a value other than 1.

 The UE shall act as specified in IETFRFC5448[40] subclause3.2 for the case when the AUTN had been incorrect.

5.4.1.2.3 EAP-TLS related procedures

5.4.1.2.3.1 General

The UE may support acting as EAP-TLS peer as specified in 3GPPTS33.501[24]. The AUSF may support acting as EAP-TLS server as specified in 3GPPTS33.501[24]. The AAA server of the CH or the DCS may support acting as EAP server of such EAP method as specified in 3GPPTS23.501[8].

The EAP-TLS enables mutual authentication of the UE and the network.

When initiating an EAP based primary authentication and key agreement procedure using EAP-TLS, the network shall select an ngKSI value. If an ngKSI is contained in an initial NAS message during a 5GMM procedure, the network shall select a different ngKSI value. The network shall send the selected ngKSI value to the UE along with each EAP message. The network shall send the ABBA value as described in subclause9.11.3.10 to the UE along with the EAP-request message and EAP-success message.

When the EAP based primary authentication and key agreement procedure uses EAP-TLS:

a) if the UE operates in SNPN access operation mode and:

1) the default UE credentials for primary authentication, if the UE is registering or registered for onboarding services in SNPN; or

2) credentials in the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data", if the UE is not registering or registered for onboarding services in SNPN;

 contain an indication to use MSK for derivation of KAUSF after success of primary authentication and key agreement procedure then the ME shall generate MSK as described in 3GPPTS33.501[24] otherwise the ME shall generate EMSK as described in 3GPPTS33.501[24];

b) if the AUSF acts as the EAP-TLS server, the AUSF shall generate EMSK as described in 3GPPTS33.501[24]; and

c) if the AAA server of the CH or the DCS acts as the EAP-TLS server, the AAA server of the CH or the DCS shall generate MSK as described in 3GPPTS33.501[24].

When handling of an EAP-request message results into generation of MSK or EMSK, if the UE operates in SNPN access operation mode and:

a) the default UE credentials for primary authentication, if the UE is registering or registered for onboarding services in SNPN; or

b) credentials in the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data", if the UE is not registering or registered for onboarding services in SNPN;

contain an indication to use MSK for derivation of KAUSF after success of primary authentication and key agreement procedure , then the ME may generate a new KAUSF from the MSK otherwise the ME may generate a new KAUSF from the EMSK.

If the ME generates a new KAUSF, the ME shall generate a new KSEAF from the new KAUSF, and the KAMF from the ABBA received together with the EAP-request message, and the new KSEAF as described in 3GPPTS33.501[24], and create a partial native 5G NAS security context identified by the ngKSI value received together with the EAP-request message in subclause5.4.1.2.4.2, in the volatile memory of the ME. If the KAMF and the partial native 5G NAS security context are created, the ME shall store the KAMF in the created partial native 5G NAS security context.

NOTE1: Generation of the new KAUSF and the new KSEAF does not result into deletion of the valid KAUSF and the valid KSEAF, if any.

The ME shall not use the new KAUSF in the verification of SOR transparent container and UE parameters update transparent container, if any are received, until receipt of an EAP-success message.

When the AUSF acts as the EAP-TLS server and handling of an EAP response message results into generation of EMSK, the AUSF shall generate the KAUSF from the EMSK, and the KSEAF from the KAUSF as described in 3GPPTS33.501[24].

NOTE2: When the AAA server of the CH or the DCS acts as the EAP-TLS server, the AAA server of the CH or the DCS provides (via the NSSAAF) the MSK and the SUPI to the AUSF. Upon reception of the MSK, the AUSF generates the KAUSF from the MSK, and the KSEAF from the KAUSF as described in 3GPPTS33.501[24].

NOTE3: The AUSF provides the KSEAF and optionally the SUPI (unless the SEAF provided the AUSF with the SUPI before) to the SEAF as described in 3GPPTS33.501[24]. Upon reception of the KSEAF and optionally the SUPI, the SEAF generates the KAMF based on the ABBA, the KSEAF and the SUPI as described in 3GPPTS33.501[24], and provides ngKSI and the KAMF to the AMF. Upon reception of the ngKSI and the KAMF, the AMF creates a partial native 5G NAS security context identified by the ngKSI, and stores the KAMF in the created partial native 5G NAS security context.

If the UE does not accept the server certificate of the network, the UE shall start timer T3520 when the AUTHENTICATION RESPONSE message containing the EAP-response message is sent. Furthermore, the UE shall stop any of the retransmission timers that are running (e.g. T3510, T3517 or T3521). Upon receiving an AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message with the EAP message IE containing an EAP-request message from the network, the UE shall stop timer T3520, if running, and then process the EAP-request message as normally.

If the network does not accept the client certificate of the UE, the network handling depends upon the type of identity used by the UE in the initial NAS message, that is:

- if the 5G-GUTI was used; or

- if the SUCI was used.

If the 5G-GUTI was used, the network should transport the EAP-failure message in the AUTHENTICATION RESULT message of the EAP result message transport procedure, initiate an identification procedure to retrieve SUCI from the UE and restart the EAP based primary authentication and key agreement procedure with the received SUCI.

If the SUCI was used for identification in the initial NAS message or in a restarted EAP based primary authentication and key agreement procedure, or the network decides not to initiate the identification procedure to retrieve SUCI from the UE after an unsuccessful the EAP based primary authentication and key agreement procedure, the network should transport the EAP-failure message in an AUTHENTICATION REJECT message of the EAP result message transport procedure.

Depending on local requirements or operator preference for emergency services, if the UE initiates a registration procedure with 5GS registration type IE set to "emergency registration" and the AMF is configured to allow emergency registration without user identity, the AMF needs not follow the procedures specified for transporting the EAP-failure message in the AUTHENTICATION REJECT message of the EAP result message transport procedure in the present subclause. The AMF may include the EAP-failure message in a response of the current 5GMM specific procedure or in the AUTHENTICATION RESULT of the EAP result message transport procedure.

If the EAP-failure message is received in an AUTHENTICATION REJECT message:

a) if the AUTHENTICATION REJECT message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS:

1) the UE shall set the update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED, delete the stored 5G-GUTI, TAI list, last visited registered TAI and ngKSI.

 In case of PLMN, the USIM shall be considered invalid until switching off the UE or the UICC containing the USIM is removed.

 In case of SNPN, if the UE is neither registered for onboarding services in SNPN nor performing initial registration for onboarding services in SNPN and the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the entry of the "list of subscriber data" with the SNPN identity of the current SNPN shall be considered invalid until the UE is switched off or the entry is updated;

 In case of SNPN, if the UE is neither registered for onboarding services in SNPN nor performing initial registration for onboarding services in SNPN and the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the UE shall consider the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" as invalid until the UE is switched off or the entry is updated.

 If the UE is registered for onboarding services in SNPN or is performing initial registration for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall store the SNPN identity in the "permanently forbidden SNPNs" list for onboarding services, enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH, and perform an SNPN selection or an SNPN selection for onboarding services according to 3GPPTS23.122[5];

2) if the UE is neither registered for onboarding services in SNPN nor performing initial registration for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall set:

i) the counter for "SIM/USIM considered invalid for GPRS services" events, the counter for "USIM considered invalid for 5GS services over non-3GPP access" events, and the counter for "SIM/USIM considered invalid for non-GPRS services" events if maintained by the UE, in case of PLMN; or

ii) the counter for "the entry for the current SNPN considered invalid for 3GPP access" events and the counter for "the entry for the current SNPN considered invalid for non-3GPP access" events in case of SNPN;

NOTE4: The term "non-3GPP access" used in the counter for "the entry for the current SNPN considered invalid for non-3GPP access" events, is used to express access to SNPN services via a PLMN.

 to UE implementation-specific maximum value.

 If the UE is registered for onboarding services in SNPN or performing initial registration for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall set the SNPN-specific attempt counter for the current SNPN to the UE implementation-specific maximum value; and

3) if the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall handle EMM parameters, 4G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and eKSI as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] for the case when the authentication procedure is not accepted by the network. The USIM shall be considered as invalid also for non-EPS services until switching off or the UICC containing the USIM is removed; and

b) if the AUTHENTICATION REJECT message is received without integrity protection, the UE shall start timer T3247 with a random value uniformly drawn from the range between 30 minutes and 60 minutes, if the timer is not running (see subclause5.3.20). 

 Additionally, if the UE is neither registered for onboarding services in SNPN nor performing initial registration for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall:

1) if the AUTHENTICATION REJECT message is received over 3GPP access, and the counter for "SIM/USIM considered invalid for GPRS services" events in case of PLMN or the counter for "the entry for the current SNPN considered invalid for 3GPP access" events in case of SNPN has a value less than a UE implementation-specific maximum value, proceed as specified in subclause5.3.20, list item 1)-a) of subclause5.3.20.2 (if the UE is not SNPN enabled or is not operating in SNPN access operation mode) or list item a) 1) of subclause5.3.20.3 (if the UE is operating in SNPN access operation mode) for the case that the 5GMM cause value received is #3;

2) if the AUTHENTICATION REJECT message is received over non-3GPP access, and the counter for "USIM considered invalid for 5GS services over non-3GPP access" events in case of PLMN or the counter for "the entry for the current SNPN considered invalid for non-3GPP access" events in case of SNPN has a value less than a UE implementation-specific maximum value, proceed as specified in subclause5.3.20, list item 1)-b) of subclause5.3.20.2 (if the UE is not operating in SNPN access operation mode) or list item a)-2) of subclause5.3.20.3 (if the UE is operating in SNPN access operation mode) for the case that the 5GMM cause value received is #3; or

3) otherwise:

i) if the AUTHENTICATION REJECT message is received over 3GPP access:

A) the UE shall set the update status for 3GPP access to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED, delete for 3GPP access only the stored 5G-GUTI, TAI list, last visited registered TAI and ngKSI.

 In case of PLMN, the UE shall consider the USIM as invalid for 5GS services via 3GPP access and invalid for non-EPS service until switching off the UE or the UICC containing the USIM is removed.

 In case of SNPN, if the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the UE shall consider the entry of the "list of subscriber data" with the SNPN identity of the current SNPN as invalid for 3GPP access until the UE is switched off or the entry is updated;

 In case of SNPN, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the UE shall consider the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" as invalid for 3GPP access until the UE is switched off or the entry is updated;

B) the UE shall set:

- the counter for "SIM/USIM considered invalid for GPRS services" events and the counter for "SIM/USIM considered invalid for non-GPRS services" events if maintained by the UE, in case of PLMN; or

- the counter for "the entry for the current SNPN considered invalid for 3GPP access" events in case of SNPN;

 to UE implementation-specific maximum value; and

C) If the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall handle 4G-GUTI, TAI list and eKSI as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] for the case when the authentication procedure is not accepted by the network. The USIM shall be considered as invalid also for non-EPS services until switching off or the UICC containing the USIM is removed; and

ii) if the AUTHENTICATION REJECT message is received over non-3GPP access:

A) the UE shall set the update status for non-3GPP access to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED, delete for non-3GPP access only the stored 5G-GUTI, TAI list, last visited registered TAI and ngKSI. In case of PLMN, the USIM shall be considered invalid for 5GS services via non-3GPP access until switching off the UE or the UICC containing the USIM is removed. In case of SNPN, the UE shall consider the entry of the "list of subscriber data" with the SNPN identity of the current SNPN shall be considered invalid for non-3GPP access until the UE is switched off or the entry is updated; and

B) the UE shall set the counter for "USIM considered invalid for 5GS services over non-3GPP access" events in case of PLMN or the counter for "the entry for the current SNPN considered invalid for non-3GPP access" events in case of SNPN to UE implementation-specific maximum value.

 If the UE is registered for onboarding services in SNPN or performing initial registration for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall:

1) if the SNPN-specific attempt counter for the SNPN sending the AUTHENTICATION REJECT message has a value less than a UE implementation-specific maximum value, increment the SNPN-specific attempt counter for the SNPN; or

2) otherwise, the UE shall set the update status to 5U3.ROAMING NOT ALLOWED, delete the stored 5G-GUTI, TAI list, last visited registered TAI, and ngKSI, store the SNPN identity in the "permanently forbidden SNPNs" list for onboarding services, enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH, and perform an SNPN selection or an SNPN selection for onboarding services according to 3GPPTS23.122[5].

If the AUTHENTICATION REJECT message is received by the UE, the UE shall abort any 5GMM signalling procedure, stop any of the timers T3510, T3517, T3519 or T3521 (if they were running), enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED and delete any stored SUCI.

Upon receiving an EAP-success message, the ME shall:

a) delete the valid KAUSF and the valid KSEAF, if any;

b) if the ME has not generated a new KAUSF and a new KSEAF and has not created a partial native 5G NAS security context when handling the EAP-request message which resulted into generation of EMSK or MSK as described above:

1) if the UE operates in SNPN access operation mode and:

i) the default UE credentials for primary authentication, if the UE is registering or registered for onboarding services in SNPN; or

ii) credentials in the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data", if the UE is not registering or registered for onboarding services in SNPN;

 contain an indication to use MSK for derivation of KAUSF after success of primary authentication and key agreement procedure then generate a new KAUSF from the MSK otherwise generate a new KAUSF from the EMSK;

2) generate a new KSEAF from the new KAUSF, and the KAMF from the ABBA that was received with the EAP-success message, and the new KSEAF as described in 3GPPTS33.501[24];

3) create a partial native 5G NAS security context identified by the ngKSI value in the volatile memory of the ME; and

4) store the KAMF in the created partial native 5G NAS security context; and

c) consider the new KAUSF to be the valid KAUSF, and the new KSEAF to be the valid KSEAF, reset the SOR counter and the UE parameter update counter to zero, store the valid KAUSF, the valid KSEAF, the SOR counter and the UE parameter update counter as specified in annexC, and use the valid KAUSF in the verification of SOR transparent container and UE parameters update transparent container, if any are received.

The UE shall consider the procedure complete.

Upon receiving an EAP-failure message, the UE shall delete the partial native 5G NAS security context and shall delete the new KAUSF and the new KSEAF, if any were created when handling the EAP-request message which resulted into generation of EMSK or MSK as described above.

The UE shall consider the procedure complete.

5.4.1.2.3A Procedures related to EAP methods other than EAP-AKA' and EAP-TLS

5.4.1.2.3A.1 General

This subclause applies when an EAP method:

a) supporting mutual authentication;

b) supporting EMSK or MSK generation; and

c) other than EAP-AKA' and EAP-TLS;

is used for primary authentication and key agreement in an SNPN.

The UE may support acting as EAP peer of such EAP method as specified in 3GPPTS33.501[24]. The AUSF may support acting as EAP server of such EAP method as specified in 3GPPTS33.501[24]. The AAA server of the CH or the DCS may support acting as EAP server of such EAP method as specified in 3GPPTS23.501[8].

When initiating an EAP based primary authentication and key agreement procedure using such EAP method, the network shall select an ngKSI value. If an ngKSI is contained in an initial NAS message during a 5GMM procedure, the network shall select a different ngKSI value. The network shall send the selected ngKSI value to the UE along with each EAP message. The network shall send the ABBA value as described in subclause9.11.3.10 to the UE along with the EAP-request message and EAP-success message.

When the EAP based primary authentication and key agreement procedure uses such EAP method:

a) if:

1) the default UE credentials for primary authentication, if the UE is registering or registered for onboarding services in SNPN; or

2) credentials in the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data", if the UE is not registering or registered for onboarding services in SNPN;

 contain an indication to use MSK for derivation of KAUSF after success of primary authentication and key agreement procedure then the ME shall generate MSK as described in 3GPPTS33.501[24] otherwise the ME shall generate EMSK as described in 3GPPTS33.501[24];

b) if the AUSF acts as the EAP server, the AUSF shall generate EMSK as described in 3GPPTS33.501[24]; and

c) if the AAA server of the CH or the DCS acts as the EAP server, the AAA server of the CH or the DCS shall generate MSK as described in 3GPPTS33.501[24].

When handling of an EAP-request message results into generation of MSK or EMSK, if:

a) the default UE credentials for primary authentication, if the UE is registering or registered for onboarding services in SNPN; or

b) credentials in the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data", if the UE is not registering or registered for onboarding services in SNPN;

contain an indication to use MSK for derivation of KAUSF after success of primary authentication and key agreement procedure then the ME may generate a new KAUSF from the MSK otherwise the ME may generate a new KAUSF from the EMSK.

If the ME generates a new KAUSF, the ME shall generate a new KSEAF from the new KAUSF, and the KAMF from the ABBA received together with the EAP-request message, and the new KSEAF as described in 3GPPTS33.501[24], and create a partial native 5G NAS security context identified by the ngKSI value received together with the EAP-request message in subclause5.4.1.2.4.2, in the volatile memory of the ME. If the KAMF and the partial native 5G NAS security context are created, the ME shall store the KAMF in the created partial native 5G NAS security context.

NOTE1: Generation of the new KAUSF and the new KSEAF does not result into deletion of the valid KAUSF and the valid KSEAF, if any.

The ME shall not use the new KAUSF in the verification of SOR transparent container and UE parameters update transparent container, if any are received, until receipt of an EAP-success message.

When the AUSF acts as the EAP server and handling of an EAP response message results into generation of EMSK, the AUSF shall generate the KAUSF from the EMSK, and the KSEAF from the KAUSF as described in 3GPPTS33.501[24].

NOTE2: When the AAA server of the CH or the DCS acts as the EAP server and handling of an EAP response message results into generation of MSK, the AAA server of the CH or the DCS provides (via the NSSAAF) the MSK and the SUPI to the AUSF. Upon reception of the MSK, the AUSF generates the KAUSF from the MSK, and the KSEAF from the KAUSF as described in 3GPPTS33.501[24].

NOTE3: The AUSF provides the KSEAF and optionally the SUPI (unless the SEAF provided the AUSF with the SUPI before) to the SEAF as described in 3GPPTS33.501[24]. Upon reception of the KSEAF and optionally the SUPI, the SEAF generates the KAMF based on the ABBA, the KSEAF and the SUPI as described in 3GPPTS33.501[24], and provides ngKSI and the KAMF to the AMF. Upon reception of the ngKSI and the KAMF, the AMF creates a partial native 5G NAS security context identified by the ngKSI, and stores the KAMF in the created partial native 5G NAS security context.

If the UE fails to authenticate the network, the UE shall start timer T3520 when the AUTHENTICATION RESPONSE message containing the EAP-response message is sent. Furthermore, the UE shall stop any of the retransmission timers that are running (e.g. T3510, T3517 or T3521). Upon receiving an AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message with the EAP message IE containing an EAP-request message from the network, the UE shall stop timer T3520, if running, and then process the EAP-request message as normally.

If the network fails to authenticate the UE, the network handling depends upon the type of identity used by the UE in the initial NAS message, that is:

- if the 5G-GUTI was used; or

- if the SUCI was used.

If the 5G-GUTI was used, the network should transport the EAP-failure message in the AUTHENTICATION RESULT message of the EAP result message transport procedure, initiate an identification procedure to retrieve SUCI from the UE and restart the EAP based primary authentication and key agreement procedure with the received SUCI.

If the SUCI was used for identification in the initial NAS message or in a restarted EAP based primary authentication and key agreement procedure, or the network decides not to initiate the identification procedure to retrieve SUCI from the UE after an unsuccessful the EAP based primary authentication and key agreement procedure, the network should transport the EAP-failure message in an AUTHENTICATION REJECT message of the EAP result message transport procedure.

If the EAP-failure message is received in an AUTHENTICATION REJECT message:

a) if the AUTHENTICATION REJECT message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS:

1) the UE shall set the update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED, delete the stored 5G-GUTI, TAI list, last visited registered TAI and ngKSI.

 In case of SNPN, if the UE is neither registered for onboarding services in SNPN nor performing initial registration for onboarding services in SNPN and the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the entry of the "list of subscriber data" with the SNPN identity of the current SNPN shall be considered invalid until the UE is switched off or the entry is updated;

 In case of SNPN, if the UE is neither registered for onboarding services in SNPN nor performing initial registration for onboarding services in SNPN and the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the UE shall consider the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" as invalid until the UE is switched off or the entry is updated.

 In case of SNPN, if the UE is registered for onboarding services in SNPN or is performing initial registration for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall store the SNPN identity in the "permanently forbidden SNPNs" list for onboarding services, enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH, and perform an SNPN selection or an SNPN selection for onboarding services according to 3GPPTS23.122[5]; and

2) if the UE is neither registered for onboarding services in SNPN nor performing initial registration for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall set the counter for "the entry for the current SNPN considered invalid for 3GPP access" events and the counter for "the entry for the current SNPN considered invalid for non-3GPP access" events in case of SNPN to UE implementation-specific maximum value.

NOTE4: The term "non-3GPP access" used in the counter for "the entry for the current SNPN considered invalid for non-3GPP access" events, is used to express access to SNPN services via a PLMN.

 If the UE is registered for onboarding services in SNPN or performing initial registration for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall set the SNPN-specific attempt counter for the current SNPN to the UE implementation-specific maximum value; and

b) if the AUTHENTICATION REJECT message is received without integrity protection, the UE shall start timer T3247 with a random value uniformly drawn from the range between 30 minutes and 60 minutes, if the timer is not running (see subclause5.3.20). 

 Additionally, if the UE is neither registered for onboarding services in SNPN nor performing initial registration for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall:

1) if the AUTHENTICATION REJECT message is received over 3GPP access, and the counter for "the entry for the current SNPN considered invalid for 3GPP access" events has a value less than a UE implementation-specific maximum value, proceed as specified in list item a) 1) of subclause5.3.20.3 for the case that the 5GMM cause value received is #3;

2) if the AUTHENTICATION REJECT message is received over non-3GPP access, and the counter for "the entry for the current SNPN considered invalid for non-3GPP access" events has a value less than a UE implementation-specific maximum value, proceed as specified in list item a)-2) of subclause5.3.20.3 for the case that the 5GMM cause value received is #3; or

3) otherwise:

i) if the AUTHENTICATION REJECT message is received over 3GPP access:

- the UE shall set the update status for 3GPP access to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED, delete for 3GPP access only the stored 5G-GUTI, TAI list, last visited registered TAI and ngKSI;

 In case of SNPN, if the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the entry of the "list of subscriber data" with the SNPN identity of the current SNPN shall be considered invalid for 3GPP access until the UE is switched off or the entry is updated;

 In case of SNPN, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the UE shall consider the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" as invalid until the UE is switched off or the entry is updated; and

- the UE shall set the counter for "the entry for the current SNPN considered invalid for 3GPP access" events to UE implementation-specific maximum value; and

ii) if the AUTHENTICATION REJECT message is received over non-3GPP access:

- the UE shall set the update status for non-3GPP access to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED, delete for non-3GPP access only the stored 5G-GUTI, TAI list, last visited registered TAI and ngKSI. The entry of the "list of subscriber data" with the SNPN identity of the current SNPN shall be considered invalid for non-3GPP access until the UE is switched off or the entry is updated; and

- the UE shall set the counter for "the entry for the current SNPN considered invalid for non-3GPP access" events to UE implementation-specific maximum value.

NOTE5: The AUTHENTICATION REJECT message "received over non-3GPP access" in this subclause refers to an AUTHENTICATION REJECT message received via a PLMN when the UE attempts to access SNPN services via a PLMN.

 If the UE is registered for onboarding services in SNPN or performing initial registration for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall:

1) if the SNPN-specific attempt counter for the SNPN sending the AUTHENTICATION REJECT message has a value less than a UE implementation-specific maximum value, increment the SNPN-specific attempt counter for the SNPN; or

2) otherwise, the UE shall set the update status to 5U3.ROAMING NOT ALLOWED, delete the stored 5G-GUTI, TAI list, last visited registered TAI, and ngKSI, store the SNPN identity in the "permanently forbidden SNPNs" list for onboarding services, enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH, and perform an SNPN selection or an SNPN selection for onboarding services according to 3GPPTS23.122[5].

If the AUTHENTICATION REJECT message is received by the UE, the UE shall abort any 5GMM signalling procedure, stop any of the timers T3510, T3517, T3519 or T3521 (if they were running), enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED and delete any stored SUCI.

Upon receiving an EAP-success message, the ME shall:

a) delete the valid KAUSF and the valid KSEAF, if any;

b) if the ME has not generated a new KAUSF and a new KSEAF and has not created a partial native 5G NAS security context when handling the EAP-request message which resulted into generation of EMSK as described above:

1) if:

i) the default UE credentials for primary authentication, if the UE is registering or registered for onboarding services in SNPN; or

ii) credentials in the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data", if the UE is not registering or registered for onboarding services in SNPN;

 contain an indication to use MSK for derivation of KAUSF after success of primary authentication and key agreement procedure then generate a new KAUSF from the MSK otherwise generate a new KAUSF from the EMSK;

2) generate a new KSEAF from the new KAUSF, and the KAMF from the ABBA that was received with the EAP-success message, and the KSEAF as described in 3GPPTS33.501[24];

3) create a partial native 5G NAS security context identified by the ngKSI value in the volatile memory of the ME; and

4) store the KAMF in the created partial native 5G NAS security context; and

c) consider the new KAUSF to be the valid KAUSF, and the new KSEAF to be the valid KSEAF, reset the SOR counter and the UE parameter update counter to zero, store the valid KAUSF, the valid KSEAF, the SOR counter and the UE parameter update counter as specified in annexC, and use the valid KAUSF in the verification of SOR transparent container and UE parameters update transparent container, if any are received.

The UE shall consider the procedure complete.

Upon receiving an EAP-failure message, the UE shall delete the partial native 5G NAS security context and shall delete the new KAUSF and the new KSEAF, if any were created when handling the EAP-request message which resulted into generation of EMSK or MSK as described above.

The UE shall consider the procedure complete.

5.4.1.2.3A.2 EAP-TTLS with two phases of authentication

The UE may support acting as EAP peer of EAP-TTLS with two phases of authentication as specified in 3GPPTS33.501[24] and acting as peer of a legacy authentication protocol as specified in 3GPPTS33.501[24]. The AUSF may support acting as EAP server of EAP-TTLS with two phases of authentication as specified in 3GPPTS33.501[24]. The AAA server of CH may support acting a server of a legacy authentication protocol as specified in 3GPPTS33.501[24].

When EAP-TTLS with two phases of authentication as specified in 3GPPTS33.501[24] is used for primary authentication and key agreement in an SNPN:

a) requirements in subclause5.4.1.2.3A.1 shall apply in addition to requirements specified in 3GPPTS33.501[24] annexU.

b) indication to use MSK for derivation of KAUSF after success of primary authentication and key agreement procedure is not included in:

1) the default UE credentials for primary authentication, if the UE is registering or registered for onboarding services in SNPN; or

2) credentials in the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data", if the UE is not registering or registered for onboarding services in SNPN.

c) the SUPI of the UE is in the form of a SUPI with the SUPI format "network specific identifier" containing a network-specific identifier.

NOTE: Support of EAP-TTLS with two phases of authentication is based on the informative requirements as specified in 3GPPTS33.501[24].

5.4.1.2.3B Procedures related to EAP methods used for primary authentication of an N5GC device

5.4.1.2.3B.1 General

This subclause applies when an EAP method:

a) supporting mutual authentication; and

b) other than EAP-AKA',

is used for primary authentication of an N5GC device, when an W-AGF supports acting on behalf of the N5GC device, the AMF supports serving the W-AGF acting on behalf of the N5GC device and the AUSF supports authentication of the N5GC device. EAP-TLS is an example of such EAP method.

NOTE1: Neither the N5GC device nor the AUSF derive any 5G related keys during or after the primary authentication.

The AUSF supporting authentication of the N5GC device shall support acting as EAP server of at least one such EAP method as specified in annexO of 3GPPTS33.501[24].

The N5GC device shall support acting as EAP peer of at least one such EAP method as specified in annexO of 3GPPTS33.501[24], which is also supported by the AUSF.

The W-AGF acting on behalf of the N5GC device provides to the N5GC device an EAP-request message, an EAP-success message or an EAP-failure message received from the network according to subclause5.4.1.2.1 and sends to the network according to subclause5.4.1.2.1 an EAP-response provided by the N5GC device. The N5GC device can inform the W-AGF acting on behalf of the N5GC device that the N5GC device fails to authenticate the network. Details of communication between the N5GC device and the W-AGF acting on behalf of the N5GC device are out of scope of this specification.

When initiating an EAP based primary authentication and key agreement procedure using such EAP method, the network shall select an ngKSI value. The network shall send the selected ngKSI value to the W-AGF acting on behalf of the N5GC device along with each EAP message. The network shall send the ABBA value as described in subclause9.11.3.10 to the W-AGF acting on behalf of the N5GC device along with the EAP-request message and EAP-success message. The W-AGF acting on behalf of the N5GC device shall not forward the ngKSI value or the ABBA value to the N5GC device.

NOTE2: The network provides the ngKSI value and the ABBA value since the ngKSI IE and the ABBA IE are mandatory IEs in AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message. The W-AGF acting on behalf of the N5GC device does not use the ngKSI value or the ABBA value provided by the network.

If the N5GC device fails to authenticate the network, the W-AGF acting on behalf of the N5GC device shall start timer T3520 when the AUTHENTICATION RESPONSE message containing the EAP-response message is sent. Furthermore, the W-AGF acting on behalf of the N5GC device shall stop any of the retransmission timers that are running (e.g. T3510, T3517 or T3521). Upon receiving an AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message with the EAP message IE containing an EAP-request message from the network, the W-AGF acting on behalf of the N5GC device shall stop timer T3520, if running, and then provides the EAP-request message to the N5GC device as normally.

If the network fails to authenticate the N5GC device, the network handling depends upon the type of identity used by the W-AGF acting on behalf of the N5GC device in the initial NAS message, that is:

a) if the 5G-GUTI was used; or

b) if the SUCI was used.

If the 5G-GUTI was used, the network should transport the EAP-failure message in the AUTHENTICATION RESULT message of the EAP result message transport procedure, initiate an identification procedure to retrieve SUCI from the W-AGF acting on behalf of the N5GC device and restart the EAP based primary authentication and key agreement procedure with the received SUCI.

If the SUCI was used for identification in the initial NAS message or in a restarted EAP based primary authentication and key agreement procedure, or the network decides not to initiate the identification procedure to retrieve SUCI from the W-AGF acting on behalf of the N5GC device after an unsuccessful EAP based primary authentication and key agreement procedure, the network should transport the EAP-failure message in an AUTHENTICATION REJECT message of the EAP result message transport procedure.

If the EAP-failure message is received in an AUTHENTICATION REJECT message, the W-AGF acting on behalf of the N5GC device shall start timer T3247 with a random value uniformly drawn from the range between 30 minutes and 60 minutes, if the timer is not running (see subclause5.3.20). Additionally, the W-AGF acting on behalf of the N5GC device shall:

a) if the counter for "USIM considered invalid for 5GS services over non-3GPP access" events has a value less than a W-AGF implementation-specific maximum value, proceed as specified in list item 1)-b) of subclause5.3.20.2 for the case that the 5GMM cause value received is #3; or

b) otherwise, set the update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED, delete the stored 5G-GUTI, TAI list, last visited registered TAI and ngKSI. The USIM shall be considered invalid for 5GS services via non-3GPP access until switching off or the UICC containing the USIM is removed.

If the AUTHENTICATION REJECT message is received by the W-AGF acting on behalf of the N5GC device, the W-AGF acting on behalf of the N5GC device shall abort any 5GMM signalling procedure, stop any of the timers T3510, T3517, T3519 or T3521 (if they were running), enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED and delete any stored SUCI.

Upon receiving an EAP-success message, the W-AGF acting on behalf of the N5GC device shall consider the procedure complete.

Upon receiving an EAP-failure message, the W-AGF acting on behalf of the N5GC device shall consider the procedure complete.

5.4.1.2.4 EAP message reliable transport procedure

5.4.1.2.4.1 General

The purpose of the EAP message reliable transport procedure is to provide a reliable transport of an EAP-request message, the ngKSI and the ABBA from the network to the UE and of an EAP-response message from the UE to the network.

The EAP message reliable transport procedure is initiated by an AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message with the EAP message IE.

5.4.1.2.4.2 EAP message reliable transport procedure initiation by the network

In order to initiate the EAP message reliable transport procedure, the AMF shall create an AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message.

The AMF shall set the EAP message IE of the AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message to the EAP-request message to be sent to the UE. The AMF shall set the ngKSI IE of the AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message to the ngKSI value selected in subclause5.4.1.2.2.2, subclause5.4.1.2.3.1 or subclause5.4.1.2.3A.1. In this release of specification, the AMF shall set the ABBA IE of the AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message  with the length of ABBA IE to 2 and the ABBA contents to be 2 octets in length with value 0000H as described in subclause9.11.3.10.

The AMF shall send the AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message to the UE, and the AMF shall start timer T3560 (see example in figure5.4.1.2.4.2.1).



Figure5.4.1.2.4.2.1: EAP message reliable transport procedure

Upon receipt of an AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message with the EAP message IE, the UE handles the EAP message received in the EAP message IE and the ABBA of the AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message.

5.4.1.2.4.3 EAP message reliable transport procedure accepted by the UE

The UE shall create an AUTHENTICATION RESPONSE message.

If the received EAP message is an EAP-request message, the UE shall set the EAP message IE of the AUTHENTICATION RESPONSE message to the EAP-response message responding to the received EAP-request message.

The UE shall send the AUTHENTICATION RESPONSE message to the AMF.

Upon receipt of an AUTHENTICATION RESPONSE message, the AMF shall stop timer T3560. If the EAP message IE is included in the AUTHENTICATION RESPONSE message, the AMF handles the EAP message received in the EAP message IE of the AUTHENTICATION RESPONSE message.

5.4.1.2.4.4 Abnormal cases on the network side

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a) Expiry of timer T3560.

 The AMF shall, on the first expiry of the timer T3560, retransmit the AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message and shall reset and start timer T3560. This retransmission is repeated four times, i.e. on the fifth expiry of timer T3560, the AMF shall abort the EAP based primary authentication and key agreement procedure and any ongoing 5GMM specific procedure, and release the N1 NAS signalling connection.

b) Lower layers indication of non-delivered NAS PDU due to handover.

 If the AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message could not be delivered due to an intra AMF handover and the target TA is included in the TAI list, then upon successful completion of the intra AMF handover the AMF shall retransmit the AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message. If a failure of handover procedure is reported by the lower layer and the N1 NAS signalling connection exists, the AMF shall retransmit the AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message.

5.4.1.2.4.5 Abnormal cases in the UE

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a) Authentication failure (5GMM cause #71 "ngKSI already in use").

 The UE shall send an AUTHENTICATION FAILURE message, with 5GMM cause #71 "ngKSI already in use", to the network and start the timer T3520 (see example in figure 5.4.1.3.7.1). Furthermore, the UE shall stop any of the retransmission timers that are running (e.g. T3510, T3517 or T3521). Upon the first receipt of an AUTHENTICATION FAILURE message from the UE with 5GMM cause #71 "ngKSI already in use", the network performs necessary actions to select a new ngKSI and send the same EAP-request message to the UE.

NOTE 1: Upon receipt of an AUTHENTICATION FAILURE message from the UE with 5GMM cause #71 "ngKSI already in use", the network can also re-initiate the EAP based primary authentication and key agreement procedure (see subclause5.4.1.2.2.2).

 Upon receiving a new AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message with the EAP message IE containing an EAP-request message from the network, the UE shall stop timer T3520, if running, process the EAP-request message as normal.

 If the network is validated successfully (an AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message that contains a valid ngKSI and EAP-request message is received), the UE shall send the AUTHENTICATION RESPONSE message to the network and shall start any retransmission timers (e.g. T3510, T3517 or T3521) if they were running and stopped when the UE received the first failed AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message.

b) Transmission failure of AUTHENTICATION RESPONSE message or AUTHENTICATION FAILURE message indication from lower layers (if the EAP based primary authentication and key agreement procedure is triggered by a registration procedure).

 The UE shall stop the timer T3520, if running, and re-initiate the registration procedure.

c) Transmission failure of AUTHENTICATION RESPONSE message or AUTHENTICATION FAILURE message indication with change in the current TAI (if the EAP based primary authentication and key agreement procedure is triggered by a service request procedure).

 The UE shall stop the timer T3520, if running.

 If the current TAI is not in the TAI list, the EAP based primary authentication and key agreement procedure shall be aborted and a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update shall be initiated.

 If the current TAI is still part of the TAI list, it is up to the UE implementation how to re-run the ongoing procedure that triggered the EAP based primary authentication and key agreement procedure.

d) Transmission failure of AUTHENTICATION RESPONSE message or AUTHENTICATION FAILURE message indication without change in the current TAI (if the authentication procedure is triggered by a service request procedure).

 The UE shall stop the timer T3520, if running. It is up to the UE implementation how to re-run the ongoing procedure that triggered the EAP based primary authentication and key agreement procedure.

e) Network failing the authentication check.

 If the UE deems that the network has failed the authentication check, then it shall request RRC to locally release the RRC connection and treat the active cell as barred (see 3GPPTS38.304[28] or 3GPPTS36.304[25C]). The UE shall start any retransmission timers (e.g. T3510, T3517 or T3521), if they were running and stopped when the UE received the first AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message containing an ngKSI that was already in use.

f) Change in the current TAI.

 If that the current TAI is not in the TAI list before the AUTHENTICATION RESPONSE message is sent, the UE may discard sending the AUTHENTICATION RESPONSE message to the network and continue with the initiation of the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration as described in subclause5.5.1.3.2.

For iteme, if no emergency service is started or is ongoing:

 The UE shall stop timer T3520, if the timer is running and the UE enters 5GMM-IDLE mode, e.g. upon detection of a lower layer failure, release of the N1 NAS signalling connection, or as the result of an inter-system change in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode from N1 mode to S1 mode.

 The UE shall deem that the network has failed the authentication check or assume that the authentication is not genuine and proceed as described in iteme above if any of the following occurs:

- the timer T3520 expires;

- the UE detects any combination of the EAP-based authentication failures: transmission of AUTHENTICATION FAILURE message with 5GMM cause #71 "ngKSI already in use", transmission of AUTHENTICATION RESPONSE message with an EAP-response message after detecting an error as described in subclause5.4.1.2.2.4, with an EAP-response message after not accepting of the server certificate as described in subclause5.4.1.2.3.1 or with an EAP-response message after failing to authenticate the network as described in subclause5.4.1.2.3A.1, during three consecutive authentication challenges. The EAP-request/AKA'-challenge challenges shall be considered as consecutive only, if the EAP-request/AKA'-challenge challenges causing the second and third EAP-based authentication failure are received by the UE, while the timer T3520 started after the previous EAP-based authentication failure is running. Not accepting of the server certificate shall be considered as consecutive only, if the EAP-request messages causing the second and third not accepting of the server certificate are received by the UE, while the timer T3520 started after the previous EAP request message causing the previous not accepting of the server certificate is running.

NOTE 2: Reception of an EAP-failure message is not considered when determining the three consecutive authentication challenges or three consecutive not accepting of the server certificate.

For item e if there is an emergency service started or is ongoin:

 The UE shall stop timer T3520, if the timer is running and the UE enters 5GMM-IDLE mode, e.g. upon detection of a lower layer failure, release of the N1 NAS signalling connection, or as the result of an inter-system change in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode from N1 mode to S1 mode.

 If a UE has an emergency PDU session established or is establishing an emergency PDU session, and sends an AUTHENTICATION FAILURE message to the AMF with the 5GMM cause appropriate for this cases (i.e. #71) or an AUTHENTICATION RESPONSE message containing an EAP-response message as described in subclause5.4.1.2.2.4, containing an EAP-response message after not accepting of the server certificate as described in subclause5.4.1.2.3.1 or containing an EAP-response message after failing to authenticate the network as described in subclause5.4.1.2.3A.1, and receives the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message before the timeout of timer T3520, the UE shall deem that the network has passed the authentication check successfully, stop timer T3520, respectively, and execute the security mode control procedure.

 If a UE has an emergency PDU session established or is establishing an emergency PDU session when timer T3520 expires, the UE shall not deem that the network has failed the authentication check and not behave as described in item e. Instead the UE shall continue using the current security context, if any, release all non-emergency PDU sessions, if any, by initiating UE-requested PDU session release procedure. If there is an ongoing PDU session establishment procedure, the UE shall release all non-emergency PDU sessions upon completion of the PDU session establishment procedure.

 The UE shall start any retransmission timers (e.g. T3510, T3517 or T3521) if:

- they were running and stopped when the UE received the AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message and detected an authentication failure; and

- the procedures associated with these timers have not yet been completed.

 The UE shall consider itself to be registered for emergency services.

5.4.1.2.5 EAP result message transport procedure

5.4.1.2.5.1 General

The purpose of the EAP result message transport procedure is to provide an EAP-success message or an EAP-failure message, and ngKSI from the network to the UE, when the EAP message cannot be piggybacked by another NAS message.

The EAP result message transport procedure is initiated:

- by an AUTHENTICATION RESULT message with the EAP message IE carrying the EAP-success message or the EAP-failure message; or

- by an AUTHENTICATION REJECT message with the EAP message IE carrying the EAP-failure message.

5.4.1.2.5.2 EAP result message transport procedure initiation by the network

In order to initiate the EAP result message transport procedure, the AMF shall create an AUTHENTICATION RESULT message or an AUTHENTICATION REJECT message.

The AMF shall set the EAP message IE of the AUTHENTICATION RESULT message to an EAP-success message or an EAP-failure message to be sent to the UE. The AMF shall set the EAP message IE of the AUTHENTICATION REJECT message to an EAP-failure message to be sent to the UE. The AMF shall set the ngKSI IE of the AUTHENTICATION RESULT message or the AUTHENTICATION REJECT message to the ngKSI value selected in subclause5.4.1.2.2.2, subclause5.4.1.2.3.1 or subclause5.4.1.2.3A.1.

The AMF shall send the AUTHENTICATION RESULT message or the AUTHENTICATION REJECT message to the UE (see example in figure5.4.1.2.5.2.1).



Figure5.4.1.2.5.2.1: EAP result message transport procedure

Upon receipt of an AUTHENTICATION RESULT message or an AUTHENTICATION REJECT message with the EAP message IE, the UE handles the EAP message received in the EAP message IE and the ABBA if received of the AUTHENTICATION RESULT message or in the AUTHENTICATION REJECT message.

5.4.1.3 5G AKA based primary authentication and key agreement procedure

5.4.1.3.1 General

The purpose of the 5G AKA based primary authentication and key agreement procedure is to provide mutual authentication between the UE and the network and to agree on the keys KAUSF, KSEAF and KAMF (see 3GPPTS33.501[24]). The cases when the 5G AKA based primary authentication and key agreement procedure is used are defined in 3GPPTS33.501[24].

The network initiates the 5G AKA based primary authentication and key agreement procedure by sending an AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message to the UE without the EAP message IE. The network shall include the ngKSI and the ABBA in AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message.

The 5G AKA based primary authentication and key agreement procedure is always initiated and controlled by the network. However, the UE can reject the 5G authentication challenge sent by the network.

The UE shall proceed with a 5G authentication challenge only if a USIM is present.

A partial native 5G NAS security context is established in the UE and the network when a 5G authentication is successfully performed. During a successful 5G AKA based primary authentication and key agreement procedure, the CK and IK are computed by the USIM. CK and IK are then used by the ME as key material to compute new keys KAUSF, KSEAF and KAMF. KAMF is stored in the 5G NAS security contexts (see 3GPPTS33.501[24]) of both the network and in the volatile memory of the ME while registered to the network, and is the root for the 5GS integrity protection and ciphering key hierarchy.

NOTE1: Generation of the new KAUSF and the new KSEAF does not result into deletion of the valid KAUSF and the valid KSEAF, if any.

The 5G AKA based primary authentication and key agreement procedure is initiated by an AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message without the EAP message IE.

Upon successful completion of the 5G AKA based primary authentication, the AMF shall initiate a security mode control procedure (see subclause5.4.2) to take the new partial native 5G NAS security context into use. 

NOTE2: The AMF shall immediately initiate a security mode control procedure (see subclause5.4.2) after 5G AKA primary authentication is successful to avoid KAUSF key mismatch between the UE and the network.

5.4.1.3.2 Authentication initiation by the network

The network may initiate a 5G AKA based primary authentication and key agreement procedure for a UE in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode at any time. For restrictions applicable after handover or inter-system change to N1 mode in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode, see subclause5.5.1.3.3.

The network initiates the 5G AKA based primary authentication and key agreement procedure by sending an AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message to the UE and starting the timer T3560 (see example in figure5.4.1.3.2.1). The AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message shall contain the parameters necessary to calculate the authentication response (see 3GPPTS33.501[24]). This message shall include the ngKSI that will be used by the UE and AMF to identify the KAMF and the partial native security context that is created if the authentication is successful. This message shall also include the ABBA parameter. In this release of specification, the network shall set the length of ABBA IE to 2 and the ABBA contents to be 2 octets in length with value 0000H as described in subclause9.11.3.10.

If an ngKSI is contained in an initial NAS message during a 5GMM procedure, the network shall include a different ngKSI value in the AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message when it initiates a 5G AKA based primary authentication and key agreement procedure.



Figure5.4.1.3.2.1: 5G AKA based primary authentication and key agreement procedure

5.4.1.3.3 Authentication response by the UE

The UE shall respond to an AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message. With the exception of the cases described in subclause5.4.1.3.6 and 5.4.1.3.7 case l, the UE shall process the 5G authentication challenge data and respond with an AUTHENTICATION RESPONSE message to the network.

Upon a successful 5G authentication challenge, the UE shall determine the PLMN identity to be used for the calculation of the new KAMF from the 5G authentication challenge data according to the following rules:

a) When the UE moves from 5GMM-IDLE mode to 5GMM-CONNECTED mode, until the first handover, the UE shall use the PLMN identity of the selected PLMN; and

b) After handover or inter-system change to N1 mode in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode,

1) if the target cell is not a shared network cell, the UE shall use the PLMN identity received as part of the broadcast system information;

2) if the target cell is a shared network cell and the UE has a valid 5G-GUTI, the UE shall use the PLMN identity that is part of the 5G-GUTI; and

3) if the target cell is a shared network cell and the UE has a valid 4G-GUTI, but not a valid 5G-GUTI, the UE shall use the PLMN identity that is part of the 4G-GUTI.

Upon a successful 5G authentication challenge, the new KAMF calculated from the 5G authentication challenge data shall be stored in a new 5G NAS security context in the volatile memory of the ME.

The USIM will compute the authentication response (RES) using the 5G authentication challenge data received from the ME, and pass RES to the ME. From the RES, RES* is then generated according to Annex A of 3GPPTS33.501[24].

In order to avoid a synchronisation failure, when the UE receives an AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message, the UE shall store the received RAND together with the RES*, in the volatile memory of the ME. When the UE receives a subsequent AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message, if the stored RAND value is equal to the new received value in the AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message, then the ME shall not pass the RAND to the USIM, but shall send the AUTHENTICATION RESPONSE message with the stored RES*. If there is no valid stored RAND in the ME or the stored RAND is different from the new received value in the AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message, the ME shall pass the RAND to the USIM, shall override any previously stored RAND and RES* with the new ones and start, or reset and restart timer T3516.

The RAND and RES* values stored in the ME shall be deleted and timer T3516, if running, shall be stopped:

a) upon receipt of a

1) SECURITY MODE COMMAND message,

2) SERVICE REJECT message,

3) REGISTRATION REJECT message,

4) REGISTRATION ACCEPT message,

5) AUTHENTICATION REJECT message, or

6) SERVICE ACCEPT message;

b) upon expiry of timer T3516;

c) if the UE enters the 5GMM state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED or 5GMM-NULL; or

d) if the UE enters 5GMM-IDLE mode.

5.4.1.3.4 Authentication completion by the network

Upon receipt of an AUTHENTICATION RESPONSE message, the network stops the timer T3560 and checks the correctness of RES* (see 3GPPTS33.501[24]).

If the 5G AKA based primary authentication and key agreement procedure has been completed successfully and the related ngKSI is stored in the 5G NAS security context of the network, the network shall include a different ngKSI value in the AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message when it initiates a new 5G AKA based primary authentication and key agreement procedure.

Upon receipt of an AUTHENTICATION FAILURE message, the network stops the timer T3560. In the case where the 5GMM cause #21 "synch failure" is received, the core network may renegotiate with the UDM/AUSF and provide the UE with new authentication parameters.

5.4.1.3.5 Authentication not accepted by the network

If the authentication response (RES) returned by the UE is not valid, the network response depends upon the type of identity used by the UE in the initial NAS message, that is:

- if the 5G-GUTI was used; or

- if the SUCI was used.

If the 5G-GUTI was used, the network should initiate an identification procedure to retrieve SUCI from the UE and restart the 5G AKA based primary authentication and key agreement procedure with the received SUCI.

If the SUCI was used for identification in the initial NAS message or in a restarted 5G AKA based primary authentication and key agreement procedure, or the network decides not to initiate the identification procedure to retrieve SUCI from the UE after an unsuccessful 5G AKA based primary authentication and key agreement procedure, the network should send an AUTHENTICATION REJECT message to the UE.

Upon receipt of an AUTHENTICATION REJECT message,

1) if the AUTHENTICATION REJECT message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS:

 the UE shall set the update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED, delete the stored 5G-GUTI, TAI list, last visited registered TAI and ngKSI.

 In case of PLMN, the USIM shall be considered invalid until switching off the UE or the UICC containing the USIM is removed.

 In case of SNPN, if the UE is neither registered for onboarding services in SNPN nor performing initial registration for onboarding services in SNPN and the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the entry of the "list of subscriber data" with the SNPN identity of the current SNPN shall be considered invalid until the UE is switched off or the entry is updated. Additionally, the UE shall consider the USIM as invalid for the current SNPN until switching off or the UICC containing the USIM is removed.

 In case of SNPN, if the UE is neither registered for onboarding services in SNPN nor performing initial registration for onboarding services in SNPN and the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the UE shall consider the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" as invalid for 3GPP access until the UE is switched off or the entry is updated. Additionally, the UE shall consider the USIM as invalid for the entry until switching off or the UICC containing the USIM is removed.

 In case of SNPN, if the UE is registered for onboarding services in SNPN or is performing initial registration for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall store the SNPN identity in the "permanently forbidden SNPNs" list for onboarding services, enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH, and perform an SNPN selection or an SNPN selection for onboarding services according to 3GPPTS23.122[5]; and

- if the UE is neither registered for onboarding services in SNPN nor performing initial registration for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall set:

i) the counter for "SIM/USIM considered invalid for GPRS services" events, the counter for "USIM considered invalid for 5GS services over non-3GPP access" events, and the counter for "SIM/USIM considered invalid for non-GPRS services" events if maintained by the UE, in case of PLMN; or

ii) the counter for "the entry for the current SNPN considered invalid for 3GPP access" events and the counter for "the entry for the current SNPN considered invalid for non-3GPP access" events in case of SNPN;

 to UE implementation-specific maximum value.

 If the UE is registered for onboarding services in SNPN or performing initial registration for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall set the SNPN-specific attempt counter for the current SNPN to the UE implementation-specific maximum value; and

- if the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall handle EMM parameters, 4G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and eKSI as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] for the case when the authentication procedure is not accepted by the network. The USIM shall be considered as invalid also for non-EPS services until switching off or the UICC containing the USIM is removed; and

2) if the AUTHENTICATION REJECT message is received without integrity protection and if timer T3516 or T3520 is running, the UE shall start timer T3247 with a random value uniformly drawn from the range between 30 minutes and 60 minutes, if the timer is not running (see subclause5.3.20). 

 Additionally, if the UE is neither registered for onboarding services in SNPN nor performing initial registration for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall:

a) if the AUTHENTICATION REJECT message is received over 3GPP access, and the counter for "SIM/USIM considered invalid for GPRS services" events in case of PLMN or the counter for "the entry for the current SNPN considered invalid for 3GPP access" events in case of SNPN has a value less than a UE implementation-specific maximum value, proceed as specified in subclause5.3.20, list item 1)-a) of subclause5.3.20.2 (if the UE is not operating in SNPN access operation mode) or list item a)-1) of subclause5.3.20.3 (if the UE is operating in SNPN access operation mode) for the case that the 5GMM cause value received is #3;

b) if the AUTHENTICATION REJECT message is received over non-3GPP access, and the counter for "USIM considered invalid for 5GS services over non-3GPP access" events in case of PLMN or the counter for "the entry for the current SNPN considered invalid for non-3GPP access" events in case of SNPN has a value less than a UE implementation-specific maximum value, proceed as specified in subclause5.3.20, list item 1)-b) of subclause5.3.20.2 (if the UE is not operating in SNPN access operation mode) or list item a)-2) of subclause5.3.20.3 (if the UE is operating in SNPN access operation mode) for the case that the 5GMM cause value received is #3.

c) otherwise:

i) if the AUTHENTICATION REJECT message is received over 3GPP access:

- The UE shall set the update status for 3GPP access to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED, delete for 3GPP access only the stored 5G-GUTI, TAI list, last visited registered TAI and ngKSI.

- In case of PLMN, the UE shall consider the USIM as invalid for 5GS services via 3GPP access and non-EPS service until switching off the UE or the UICC containing the USIM is removed.

 In case of SNPN, the UE shall consider the entry of the "list of subscriber data" with the SNPN identity of the current SNPN shall be considered invalid for 3GPP access until the UE is switched off or the entry is updated. Additionally, the UE shall consider the USIM as invalid for the current SNPN via 3GPP access until switching off or the UICC containing the USIM is removed.

- The UE shall set:

- the counter for "SIM/USIM considered invalid for GPRS services" events and the counter for "SIM/USIM considered invalid for non-GPRS services" events if maintained by the UE, in case of PLMN; or

- the counter for "the entry for the current SNPN considered invalid for 3GPP access" events in case of SNPN;

 to UE implementation-specific maximum value.

- If the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall handle 4G-GUTI, TAI list and eKSI as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] for the case when the authentication procedure is not accepted by the network. The USIM shall be considered as invalid also for non-EPS services until switching off or the UICC containing the USIM is removed; and

ii) if the AUTHENTICATION REJECT message is received over non-3GPP access:

- the UE shall set the update status for non-3GPP access to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED, delete for non-3GPP access only the stored 5G-GUTI, TAI list, last visited registered TAI and ngKSI;

- in case of PLMN, the UE shall consider the USIM as invalid for 5GS services via non-3GPP access until switching off the UE or the UICC containing the USIM is removed.

 In case of SNPN, the UE shall consider the entry of the "list of subscriber data" with the SNPN identity of the current SNPN as invalid for non-3GPP access until the UE is switched off or the entry is updated. Additionally, the UE shall consider the USIM as invalid for the current SNPN and for non-3GPP access until switching off or the UICC containing the USIM is removed; and

- the UE shall set:

- the counter for "USIM considered invalid for 5GS services over non-3GPP access" events to UE implementation-specific maximum value in case of PLMN; or

- the counter for "the entry for the current SNPN considered invalid for non-3GPP access" events to UE implementation-specific maximum value in case of SNPN.

 If the UE is registered for onboarding services in SNPN or performing initial registration for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall:

1) if the SNPN-specific attempt counter for the SNPN sending the AUTHENTICATION REJECT message has a value less than a UE implementation-specific maximum value, increment the SNPN-specific attempt counter for the SNPN; or

2) otherwise, the UE shall set the update status to 5U3.ROAMING NOT ALLOWED, delete the stored 5G-GUTI, TAI list, last visited registered TAI, and ngKSI, store the SNPN identity in the "permanently forbidden SNPNs" list for onboarding services, enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH, and perform an SNPN selection or an SNPN selection for onboarding services according to 3GPPTS23.122[5].

If the AUTHENTICATION REJECT message is received by the UE, the UE shall abort any 5GMM signalling procedure, stop any of the timers T3510, T3516, T3517, T3519, T3520 or T3521 (if they were running), enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED and delete any stored SUCI.

Depending on local requirements or operator preference for emergency services, if the UE initiates a registration procedure with 5GS registration type IE set to "emergency registration" and the AMF is configured to allow emergency registration without user identity, the AMF needs not follow the procedures specified for the authentication failure in the present subclause. The AMF may continue a current 5GMM specific procedure.

5.4.1.3.6 Authentication not accepted by the UE

In the 5G authentication challenge, the UE shall check the 5G authentication challenge data (RAND, AUTN and ngKSI) received in the AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message to verify authenticity of the 5G core network.

The ME shall check that ngKSI received in the AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message is not already in use. The ME shall forward the RAND and AUTN to the USIM to check.

The UE may reject the core network due to an incorrect AUTN or ngKSI parameter. If the UE has to reject the 5G authentication challenge, the UE shall return AUTHENTICATION FAILURE message to the network with a cause value indicating the reason for the failure (see 3GPPTS33.501[24]).

Incorrect 5G authentication challenge data contains four possible causes for authentication failure:

a) MAC code failure:

 If the UE finds the MAC code (supplied by the core network in the AUTN parameter) to be invalid, the UE shall send an AUTHENTICATION FAILURE message to the network, with the 5GMM cause #20 "MAC failure". The UE shall then follow the procedure described in subclause5.4.1.3.7, item c.

b) Non-5G authentication unacceptable:

 If the UE finds that the "separation bit" in the AMF field of AUTN supplied by the core network is set to 0, the UE shall send an AUTHENTICATION FAILURE message to the network, with the 5GMM cause #26 "non-5G authentication unacceptable" (see subclause6.1.3 in 3GPPTS33.501[24]). The UE shall then follow the procedure described in subclause5.4.1.3.7, item d.

c) ngKSI already in use:

 If the UE detects that ngKSI received in the AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message is already in use in the UE shall send an AUTHENTICATION FAILURE message to the network, with the 5GMM cause #71 "ngKSI already in use". The UE shall then follow the procedure described in subclause5.4.1.3.7, item e.

d) SQN failure:

 If the UE finds the sequence number SQN (supplied by the core network in the AUTN parameter) to be out of range, the UE shall send an AUTHENTICATION FAILURE message to the network, with the 5GMM cause #21 "synch failure" and a re-synchronization token AUTS provided by the USIM (see 3GPPTS33.102[23]). The UE shall then follow the procedure described in subclause5.4.1.3.7, item f.

If the UE returns an AUTHENTICATION FAILURE message to the network, the UE shall delete any previously stored RAND and RES* and shall stop timer T3516, if running.

If the UE has an emergency PDU session established or is establishing such a PDU session, additional UE requirements are specified in subclause5.4.1.3.7, under "for items c, d, e and f".

5.4.1.3.7 Abnormal cases

a) Lower layer failure.

 Upon detection of lower layer failure before the AUTHENTICATION RESPONSE message is received, the network shall abort the procedure.

b) Expiry of timer T3560.

 The network shall, on the first expiry of the timer T3560, retransmit the AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message and shall reset and start timer T3560. This retransmission is repeated four times, i.e. on the fifth expiry of timer T3560, the network shall abort the 5G AKA based primary authentication and key agreement procedure and any ongoing 5GMM specific procedure and release the N1 NAS signalling connection.

c) Authentication failure (5GMM cause #20 "MAC failure").

 The UE shall send an AUTHENTICATION FAILURE message, with 5GMM cause #20 "MAC failure" according to subclause5.4.1.3.6, to the network and start timer T3520 (see example in figure5.4.1.3.7.1). Furthermore, the UE shall stop any of the retransmission timers that are running (e.g. T3510, T3517 or T3521). Upon the first receipt of an AUTHENTICATION FAILURE message from the UE with 5GMM cause #20 "MAC failure", the network may initiate the identification procedure described in subclause5.4.3. This is to allow the network to obtain the SUCI from the UE. The network may then check that the 5G-GUTI originally used in the 5G authentication challenge corresponded to the correct SUPI. Upon receipt of the IDENTITY REQUEST message from the network, the UE shall proceed as specified in subclause5.4.3.3.

NOTE1: Upon receipt of an AUTHENTICATION FAILURE message from the UE with 5GMM cause #20 "MAC failure", the network may also terminate the 5G AKA based primary authentication and key agreement procedure (see subclause5.4.1.3.5).

 If the mapping of 5G-GUTI to SUPI in the network was incorrect, the network should respond by sending a new AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message to the UE. Upon receiving the new AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message from the network, the UE shall stop the timer T3520, if running, and then process the 5G challenge information as normal. If the mapping of 5G-GUTI to SUPI in the network was correct, the network should terminate the 5G AKA based primary authentication and key agreement procedure by sending an AUTHENTICATION REJECT message (see subclause5.4.1.3.5).

 If the network is validated successfully (an AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message that contains a valid SQN and MAC is received), the UE shall send the AUTHENTICATION RESPONSE message to the network and shall start any retransmission timers (e.g. T3510, T3517 or T3521) if they were running and stopped when the UE received the first failed AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message.

 If the UE receives the second AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message, and the MAC value cannot be resolved, the UE shall follow the procedure specified in this subclause, itemc, starting again from the beginning, or if the message contains a UMTS authentication challenge, the UE shall follow the procedure specified in itemd. If the SQN is invalid, the UE shall proceed as specified in itemf.



Figure5.4.1.3.7.1: Authentication failure during 5G AKA based primary authentication and key agreement procedure

d) Authentication failure (5GMM cause #26 "non-5G authentication unacceptable").

 The UE shall send an AUTHENTICATION FAILURE message, with 5GMM cause #26 "non-5G authentication unacceptable", to the network and start the timer T3520 (see example in figure 5.4.1.3.7.1). Furthermore, the UE shall stop any of the retransmission timers that are running (e.g. T3510, T3517 or T3521). Upon the first receipt of an AUTHENTICATION FAILURE message from the UE with 5GMM cause #26 "non-5G authentication unacceptable", the network may initiate the identification procedure described in subclause5.4.3. This is to allow the network to obtain the SUCI from the UE. The network may then check that the 5G-GUTI originally used in the 5G authentication challenge corresponded to the correct SUPI. Upon receipt of the IDENTITY REQUEST message from the network, the UE shall proceed as specified in subclause5.4.3.3.

NOTE2: Upon receipt of an AUTHENTICATION FAILURE message from the UE with 5GMM cause #26 "non-5G authentication unacceptable", the network may also terminate the 5G AKA based primary authentication and key agreement procedure (see subclause5.4.1.3.5).

 If the mapping of 5G-GUTI to SUPI in the network was incorrect, the network should respond by sending a new AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message to the UE. Upon receiving the new AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message from the network, the UE shall stop the timer T3520, if running, and then process the 5G challenge information as normal. If the mapping of 5G-GUTI to SUPI in the network was correct, the network should terminate the 5G AKA based primary authentication and key agreement authentication procedure by sending an AUTHENTICATION REJECT message (see subclause5.4.1.3.5).

 If the network is validated successfully (an AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message that contains a valid 5G authentication challenge is received), the UE shall send the AUTHENTICATION RESPONSE message to the network and shall start any retransmission timers (e.g. T3510, T3517 or T3521) if they were running and stopped when the UE received the first failed AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message.

e) Authentication failure (5GMM cause #71 "ngKSI already in use").

 The UE shall send an AUTHENTICATION FAILURE message, with 5GMM cause #71 "ngKSI already in use", to the network and start the timer T3520 (see example in figure 5.4.1.3.7.1). Furthermore, the UE shall stop any of the retransmission timers that are running (e.g. T3510, T3517 or T3521). Upon the first receipt of an AUTHENTICATION FAILURE message from the UE with 5GMM cause #71 "ngKSI already in use", the network performs necessary actions to select a new ngKSI and send the same 5G authentication challenge to the UE.

NOTE3: Upon receipt of an AUTHENTICATION FAILURE message from the UE with 5GMM cause #71 "ngKSI already in use", the network may also re-initiate the 5G AKA based primary authentication and key agreement procedure (see subclause5.4.1.3.2).

 Upon receiving the new AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message from the network, the UE shall stop the timer T3520, if running, and then process the 5G challenge information as normal.

 If the network is validated successfully (an AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message that contains a valid ngKSI, SQN and MAC is received), the UE shall send the AUTHENTICATION RESPONSE message to the network and shall start any retransmission timers (e.g. T3510, T3517 or T3521) if they were running and stopped when the UE received the first failed AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message.

f) Authentication failure (5GMM cause #21 "synch failure").

 The UE shall send an AUTHENTICATION FAILURE message, with 5GMM cause #21 "synch failure", to the network and start the timer T3520 (see example in figure5.4.1.3.7.1). Furthermore, the UE shall stop any of the retransmission timers that are running (e.g. T3510, T3517 or T3521). Upon the first receipt of an AUTHENTICATION FAILURE message from the UE with the 5GMM cause #21 "synch failure", the network shall use the returned AUTS parameter from the authentication failure parameter IE in the AUTHENTICATION FAILURE message, to re-synchronise. The re-synchronisation procedure requires the AMF to delete all unused authentication vectors for that SUPI and obtain new vectors from the UDM/AUSF. When re-synchronisation is complete, the network shall initiate the 5G AKA based primary authentication and key agreement procedure. Upon receipt of the AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message, the UE shall stop the timer T3520, if running.

NOTE4: Upon receipt of two consecutive AUTHENTICATION FAILURE messages from the UE with 5GMM cause #21 "synch failure", the network may terminate the 5G AKA based primary authentication and key agreement procedure by sending an AUTHENTICATION REJECT message.

 If the network is validated successfully (a new AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message is received which contains a valid SQN and MAC) while T3520 is running, the UE shall send the AUTHENTICATION RESPONSE message to the network and shall start any retransmission timers (e.g. T3510, T3517 or T3521), if they were running and stopped when the UE received the first failed AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message.

 Upon receipt of an AUTHENTICATION REJECT message, the UE shall perform the actions as specified in subclause5.4.1.3.5.

g) Network failing the authentication check.

 If the UE deems that the network has failed the authentication check, then it shall request RRC to locally release the RRC connection and treat the active cell as barred (see 3GPPTS38.304[28] or 3GPPTS36.304[25C]). The UE shall start any retransmission timers (e.g. T3510, T3517 or T3521), if they were running and stopped when the UE received the first AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message containing an incorrect authentication challenge data causing authentication failure.

h) Transmission failure of AUTHENTICATION RESPONSE message or AUTHENTICATION FAILURE message indication from lower layers (if the 5G AKA based primary authentication and key agreement procedure is triggered by a registration procedure).

 The UE shall stop the timer T3520, if running, and re-initiate the registration procedure.

i) Transmission failure of AUTHENTICATION RESPONSE message or AUTHENTICATION FAILURE message indication with change in the current TAI (if the 5G AKA based primary authentication and key agreement procedure is triggered by a service request procedure).

 The UE shall stop the timer T3520, if running.

 If the current TAI is not in the TAI list, the 5G AKA based primary authentication and key agreement procedure shall be aborted and a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update shall be initiated.

 If the current TAI is still part of the TAI list, it is up to the UE implementation how to re-run the ongoing procedure that triggered the 5G AKA based primary authentication and key agreement procedure.

j) Transmission failure of AUTHENTICATION RESPONSE message or AUTHENTICATION FAILURE message indication without change in the current TAI (if the authentication procedure is triggered by a service request procedure).

 The UE shall stop the timer T3520, if running. It is up to the UE implementation how to re-run the ongoing procedure that triggered the 5G AKA based primary authentication and key agreement procedure.

k) Lower layers indication of non-delivered NAS PDU due to handover.

 If the AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message could not be delivered due to an intra AMF handover and the target TA is included in the TAI list, then upon successful completion of the intra AMF handover the AMF shall retransmit the AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message. If a failure of handover procedure is reported by the lower layer and the N1 NAS signalling connection exists, the AMF shall retransmit the AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message.

l) Change in the current TAI.

 If the current TAI is not in the TAI list before the AUTHENTICATION RESPONSE message is sent, the UE may discard sending the AUTHENTICATION RESPONSE message to the network and continue with the initiation of the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration as described in subclause5.5.1.3.2.

m) AUTHENTICATION REJECT message is received without integrity protection and neither timer T3516 nor T3520 is running.

 If an AUTHENTICATION REJECT message is received without integrity protection and if neither timer T3516 nor T3520 is running, then the UE shall discard the AUTHENTICATION REJECT message. Additionally, the UE may request RRC to locally release the RRC connection and treat the active cell as barred (see 3GPPTS38.304[28] or 3GPPTS36.304[25C]).

For itemsc, d, e, and f if no emergency service is started or is ongoing:

 The UE shall stop timer T3520, if the timer is running and the UE enters 5GMM-IDLE mode, e.g. upon detection of a lower layer failure, release of the N1 NAS signalling connection, or as the result of an inter-system change in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode from N1 mode to S1 mode.

 The UE shall deem that the network has failed the authentication check or assume that the authentication is not genuine and proceed as described in itemg above if any of the following occurs:

- the timer T3520 expires;

- the UE detects any combination of the 5G authentication failures: 5GMM causes #20 "MAC failure", #21 "synch failure", #26 "non-5G authentication unacceptable" or #71 "ngKSI already in use", during three consecutive authentication challenges. The 5G authentication challenges shall be considered as consecutive only, if the 5G authentication challenges causing the second and third 5G authentication failure are received by the UE, while the timer T3520 started after the previous 5G authentication failure is running.

For itemsc, d, e, and f if there is an emergency service started or is ongoing:

 The UE shall stop timer T3520, if the timer is running and the UE enters 5GMM-IDLE mode, e.g. upon detection of a lower layer failure, release of the N1 NAS signalling connection, or as the result of an inter-system change in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode from N1 mode to S1 mode.

 If there is an ongoing service request procedure for emergency services fallback the UE shall abort the service request procedure, stop timer T3517 and locally release any resources allocated for the service request procedure and enters state 5GMM-REGISTERED. The UE shall attempt to select an E-UTRA cell connected to EPC or 5GCN according to the domain priority and selection rules specified in 3GPPTS23.167[6]. If the UE finds a suitable E-UTRA cell, it then proceeds with the appropriate EMM or 5GMM procedures. If the UE operating in single-registration mode has changed to S1 mode, it shall disable the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access.

 Depending on local requirements or operator preference for emergency services, if the UE has an emergency PDU session established or is establishing an emergency PDU session, the AMF need not follow the procedures specified for the authentication failure specified in the present subclause. The AMF may respond to the AUTHENTICATION FAILURE message by initiating the security mode control procedure selecting the "null integrity protection algorithm" 5G-IA0, "null ciphering algorithm" 5G-EA0 or may abort the 5G AKA based primary authentication and key agreement procedure and continue using the current security context, if any. The AMF shall indicate to the SMF to perform the release of all non-emergency PDU sessions, if any. If there is an ongoing PDU session establishment procedure, the AMF shall indicate to the SMF to perform the release of all non-emergency PDU sessions upon completion of the PDU session establishment procedure. The network shall behave as if the UE is registered for emergency services.

 If a UE has an emergency PDU session established or is establishing an emergency PDU session and sends an AUTHENTICATION FAILURE message to the AMF with the 5GMM cause appropriate for these cases (#20, #21, #26, or #71 respectively) and receives the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message before the timeout of timer T3520, the UE shall deem that the network has passed the authentication check successfully, stop timer T3520, respectively, and execute the security mode control procedure.

 If a UE has an emergency PDU session established or is establishing an emergency PDU session when timer T3520 expires, the UE shall not deem that the network has failed the authentication check and not behave as described in item g. Instead the UE shall continue using the current security context, if any, release all non-emergency PDU sessions, if any, by initiating UE-requested PDU session release procedure. If there is an ongoing PDU session establishment procedure, the UE shall release all non-emergency PDU sessions upon completion of the PDU session establishment procedure.

 The UE shall start any retransmission timers (e.g. T3510, T3517 or T3521) if:

- they were running and stopped when the UE received the AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message and detected an authentication failure; and

- the procedures associated with these timers have not yet been completed.

 The UE shall behave as if the UE is registered for emergency services.

5.4.2 Security mode control procedure

5.4.2.1 General

The purpose of the NAS security mode control procedure is to take a 5G NAS security context into use, and initialise and start NAS signalling security between the UE and the AMF with the corresponding 5G NAS keys and 5G NAS security algorithms.

Furthermore, the network may also initiate the security mode control procedure in the following cases:

a)- in order to change the 5G NAS security algorithms for a current 5G NAS security context already in use;

b) in order to change the value of uplink NAS COUNT used in the latest SECURITY MODE COMPLETE message as described in 3GPPTS33.501[24],subclause6.9.4.4; and

c) in order to provide the Selected EPS NAS security algorithms to the UE.

For restrictions concerning the concurrent running of a security mode control procedure with other security related procedures in the AS or inside the core network see 3GPPTS33.501[24], subclause6.9.5.

If the security mode control procedure is initiated after successful 5G AKA based primary authentication and key agreement procedure and the security mode control procedure intends to bring into use the partial native 5G NAS security context created by the 5G AKA based primary authentication and key agreement procedure and the UE accept received security mode command (see subclause5.4.2.3), the ME shall:

a) delete the valid KAUSF and the valid KSEAF, if any; and

b) consider the new KAUSF to be the valid KAUSF, and the new KSEAF to be the valid KSEAF, reset the SOR counter and the UE parameter update counter to zero, and store the valid KAUSF, the valid KSEAF , the SOR counter and the UE parameter update counter as specified in annexC and use the valid KAUSF in the verification of SOR transparent container and UE parameters update transparent container, if any are received.

NOTE: The AMF does not perform a security mode control procedure when the 5G AKA based primary authentication procedure successfully authenticates a 5G ProSe layer-3 remote UE accessing the network via a 5G ProSe layer-3 UE-to-network relay UE served by the AMF.

5.4.2.2 NAS security mode control initiation by the network

The AMF initiates the NAS security mode control procedure by sending a SECURITY MODE COMMAND message to the UE and starting timer T3560 (see example in figure5.4.2.2).

The AMF shall reset the downlink NAS COUNT counter and use it to integrity protect the initial SECURITY MODE COMMAND message if the security mode control procedure is initiated:

a) to take into use the security context created after a successful execution of the 5G AKA based primary authentication and key agreement procedure or the EAP based primary authentication and key agreement procedure; or

b) upon receipt of REGISTRATION REQUEST message, if the AMF needs to create a mapped 5G NAS security context (i.e. the type of security context flag is set to "mapped security context" in the ngKSI IE included in the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message).

The AMF shall send the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message unciphered, but shall integrity protect the message with the 5G NAS integrity key based on KAMF or mapped K'AMF indicated by the ngKSI included in the message. The AMF shall set the security header type of the message to "integrity protected with new 5G NAS security context".

The AMF shall create a locally generated KAMF and send the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message including an ngKSI value in the ngKSI IE set to "000" and 5G-IA0 and 5G-EA0 as the selected NAS security algorithms only when the security mode control procedure is initiated:

a) during an initial registration procedure for emergency services if no valid 5G NAS security context is available;

b) during a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update for a UE that has an emergency PDU session if no valid 5G NAS security context is available;

c) during a service request procedure for a UE that has an emergency PDU session if no valid 5G NAS security context is available; or

d) after a failed primary authentication and key agreement procedure for a UE that has an emergency PDU session or is establishing an emergency PDU session, if continued usage of a valid 5G NAS security context is not possible.

When the AMF sends the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message including an ngKSI value in the ngKSI IE set to "000" and 5G-IA0 and 5G-EA0 as the selected NAS security algorithms, if:

a) the AMF supports N26 interface;

b) the UE set the S1 mode bit to "S1 mode supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message; and

c) the security mode control procedure is initiated during an initial registration procedure for emergency services, during a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update for a UE that has an emergency PDU session, or during a service request procedure for a UE that has an emergency PDU session,

the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message shall also include the Selected EPS NAS security algorithms IE. The selected EPS NAS security algorithms shall be set to EIA0 and EEA0.

The UE shall process a SECURITY MODE COMMAND message including an ngKSI value in the ngKSI IE set to "000" and 5G-IA0 and 5G-EA0 as the selected NAS security algorithms and, if accepted, create a locally generated KAMF when the security mode control procedure is initiated:

a) during an initial registration procedure for emergency services;

b) during a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update for a UE that has an emergency PDU session;

c) during a service request procedure for a UE that has an emergency PDU session; or

d) after a primary authentication and key agreement procedure for a UE that has an emergency PDU session or is establishing an emergency PDU session.

NOTE1: The process for creation of the locally generated KAMF by the AMF and the UE is implementation dependent. The KAMF is specified in 3GPPTS33.501[24].

Upon receipt of a REGISTRATION REQUEST message, if the AMF does not have the valid current 5G NAS security context indicated by the UE, the AMF shall either:

a) indicate the use of the new mapped 5G NAS security context to the UE by setting the type of security context flag in the ngKSI IE to "mapped security context" and the KSI value related to the security context of the source system; or

b) set the ngKSI value to "000" in the ngKSI IE if the AMF sets 5G-IA0 and 5G-EA0 as the selected NAS security algorithms for a UE that has an emergency PDU session.

Upon receipt of a REGISTRATION REQUEST message, if the AMF has the valid current 5G NAS security context indicated by the UE, the AMF supports N26 interface and the UE set the S1 mode bit to "S1 mode supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and the UE is not registered for disaster roaming, the AMF shall check whether the selected EPS NAS security algorithms was successfully provided to the UE. If not, the AMF shall initiate the NAS security mode control procedure by sending a SECURITY MODE COMMAND message with the Selected EPS NAS security algorithms IE to the UE.

While having a current mapped 5G NAS security context with the UE, if the AMF needs to take the native 5G NAS security context into use, the AMF shall include the ngKSI that indicates the native 5G NAS security context in the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message.

The AMF shall include the replayed security capabilities of the UE (including the security capabilities with regard to NAS, RRC and UP (user plane) ciphering as well as NAS and RRC integrity, and other possible target network security capabilities, i.e. E-UTRAN if the UE included them in the message to network), the selected 5GS ciphering and integrity algorithms and the ngKSI.

If a UE is already registered over one access to a PLMN and the AMF decides to skip primary authentication and key agreement procedure when the UE attempts to register over the other access to the same PLMN, the AMF shall take into use the UE's current 5G NAS security context over the other access that the UE is registering. In this case, SECURITY MODE COMMAND message is not sent to the UE.

If the UE is registered to the same AMF and the same PLMN over both 3GPP access and non-3GPP access, and the UE is in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode over both the 3GPP and non-3GPP accesses, then at any time the primary authentication and key agreement procedure has successfully completed over:

a) the 3GPP access, the AMF includes the ngKSI in the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message over the 3GPP access. When the AMF sends the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message to UE over the non-3GPP access to take into use the new 5G NAS security context, the AMF shall include the same ngKSI in the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message to identify the new 5G NAS security context; or

b) the non-3GPP access, the AMF includes the ngKSI in the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message over the non-3GPP access. When the AMF sends the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message to UE over the 3GPP access to take into use the new 5G NAS security context, the AMF shall include the same ngKSI in the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message to identify the new 5G NAS security context.

The AMF may initiate a SECURITY MODE COMMAND in order to change the 5G security algorithms for a current 5G NAS security context already in use. The AMF re-derives the 5G NAS keys from KAMF with the new 5G algorithm identities as input and provides the new 5GS algorithm identities within the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message. The AMF shall set the security header type of the message to "integrity protected with new 5G NAS security context".

If, during an ongoing registration procedure, the AMF is initiating a SECURITY MODE COMMAND (i.e. after receiving the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, but before sending a response to that message) and:

a) the REGISTRATION REQUEST message does not successfully pass the integrity check at the AMF; or

b) the AMF can not decipher the value part of the NAS message container IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message;

the AMF shall include the Additional 5G security information IE with the RINMR bit set to "Retransmission of the initial NAS message requested" in the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message requesting the UE to send the entire REGISTRATION REQUEST message in the SECURITY MODE COMPLETE message as described in 3GPPTS33.501[24].

NOTE2: The AMF uses the UE security capability which was provided by the UE.

If, during an ongoing service request procedure for a UE with an emergency PDU session, the AMF is initiating a SECURITY MODE COMMAND (i.e. after receiving the SERVICE REQUEST message or the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message, but before sending a response to that message) and the SERVICE REQUEST message or the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message does not successfully pass the integrity check at the AMF, the AMF shall include the Additional 5G security information IE with the RINMR bit set to "Retransmission of the initial NAS message requested" in the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message requesting the UE to send the entire:

a) SERVICE REQUEST message; or

b) CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message excluding non-cleartext IEs, except the Uplink data status IE if needed (see subclause5.4.2.3);

in the SECURITY MODE COMPLETE message as described in 3GPPTS33.501[24].

Additionally, the AMF may request the UE to include its IMEISV in the SECURITY MODE COMPLETE message.

If the AMF supports N26 interface and the UE set the S1 mode bit to "S1 mode supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and the AMF needs to provide the selected EPS NAS security algorithms to the UE, the AMF shall select ciphering and integrity algorithms to be used in the EPS and indicate them to the UE via the Selected EPS NAS security algorithms IE in the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message.

NOTE3: The AS and NAS security capabilities are the same, i.e. if the UE supports one algorithm for NAS, the same algorithm is also supported for AS.

If the AMF performs horizontal key derivation e.g. during the mobility and periodic registration update or when the UE is already registered in the PLMN with another access type as described in 3GPPTS33.501[24], the AMF shall include horizontal derivation parameter in the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message.

If the security mode control procedure is initiated after successful EAP based primary authentication and key agreement procedure and the security mode control procedure intends to bring into use the partial native 5G NAS security context created by the EAP based primary authentication and key agreement procedure, the AMF shall set the EAP message IE of the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message to an EAP-success message to be sent to the UE.



Figure5.4.2.2: Security mode control procedure

5.4.2.3 NAS security mode command accepted by the UE

Upon receipt of the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message, the UE shall check whether the security mode command can be accepted or not. This is done by performing the integrity check of the message, and by checking that the received Replayed UE security capabilities IE has not been altered compared to the latest values that the UE sent to the network.

When the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message includes an EAP-success message the UE handles the EAP-success message and the ABBA as described in subclause5.4.1.2.2.8, 5.4.1.2.3.1, 5.4.1.2.3A.1 and 5.4.1.2.3B.1.

If:

a) the UE is registered for emergency services, performing initial registration for emergency services, establishing an emergency PDU session or has an emergency PDU session established;

b) the W-AGF acts on behalf of the FN-RG; or

c) the W-AGF acts on behalf of the N5GC device,

and the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message is received with ngKSI value "000" and 5G-IA0 and 5G-EA0 as selected 5G NAS security algorithms, the UE shall locally derive and take in use 5G NAS security context. The UE shall delete existing current 5G NAS security context.

The UE shall accept a SECURITY MODE COMMAND message indicating the "null integrity protection algorithm" 5G-IA0 as the selected 5G NAS integrity algorithm only if the message is received when 

a) the UE is registered for emergency services, performing initial registration for emergency services, establishing an emergency PDU session or has an emergency PDU session established; or

b) the W-AGF acts on behalf of the FN-RG; or 

c) the W-AGF acts on behalf of the N5GC device.

If the type of security context flag included in the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message is set to "native security context" and if the ngKSI matches a valid non-current native 5G NAS security context held in the UE while the UE has a mapped 5G NAS security context as the current 5G NAS security context, the UE shall take the non-current native 5G NAS security context into use which then becomes the current native 5G NAS security context and delete the mapped 5G NAS security context.

The UE shall ignore the Replayed S1 UE security capabilities IE if this IE is included in the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message.

If the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message can be accepted, the UE shall take the 5G NAS security context indicated in the message into use. The UE shall in addition reset the uplink NAS COUNT counter if:

a) the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message is received in order to take a 5G NAS security context into use created after a successful execution of the 5G AKA based primary authentication and key agreement procedure or the EAP based primary authentication and key agreement procedure; or

b) the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message received includes the type of security context flag set to "mapped security context" in the NAS key set identifier IE the ngKSI does not match the current 5G NAS security context, if it is a mapped 5G NAS security context.

 If the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message can be accepted and a new 5G NAS security context is taken into use and SECURITY MODE COMMAND message does not indicate the "null integrity protection algorithm" 5G-IA0 as the selected NAS integrity algorithm, the UE shall:

- if the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message has been successfully integrity checked using an estimated downlink NAS COUNT equal to 0, then the UE shall set the downlink NAS COUNT of this new 5G NAS security context to 0;

- otherwise the UE shall set the downlink NAS COUNT of this new 5G NAS security context to the downlink NAS COUNT that has been used for the successful integrity checking of the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message.

If the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message includes the horizontal derivation parameter indicating "KAMF derivation is required", the UE shall derive a new K'AMF, as specified in 3GPPTS33.501[24] for KAMF to K'AMF derivation in mobility, and set both uplink and downlink NAS COUNTs to zero. When the new 5G NAS security context is taken into use for current access and the UE is registered with the same PLMN over the 3GPP access and the non-3GPP access:

a) the UE is in 5GMM-IDLE mode over the non-current access, the AMF and the UE shall activate the new 5G NAS security context over the non-current access as described in 3GPPTS33.501[24]. The AMF and the UE shall set the downlink NAS COUNT and uplink NAS COUNT to zero for the non-current access; or

b) the UE is in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode over the non-current access, the AMF shall send the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message over the non-current access to activate the new 5G NAS security context that was activated over the current access as described in 3GPPTS33.501[24]. The AMF shall include the same ngKSI in the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message to identify the new 5G NAS security context.

If the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message includes the horizontal derivation parameter indicating "KAMF derivation is not required" or the Additional 5G security information IE is not included in the message, the UE is registered with the same PLMN over the 3GPP access and non-3GPP access, then after the completion of a security mode control procedure over the current access:

a) the UE is in 5GMM-IDLE mode over the non-current access, the AMF and the UE shall activate the new 5G NAS security context for the non-current access. If a primary authentication and key agreement procedure was completed before the security mode control procedure, the AMF and the UE shall set the downlink NAS COUNT and uplink NAS COUNT to zero for the non-current access, otherwise the downlink NAS COUNT and uplink NAS COUNT for the non-3GPP access are not changed; or

b) the UE is in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode over the non-current access, the AMF shall send the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message over the non-current access to activate the new 5G NAS security context that was activated over the current access as described in 3GPPTS33.501[24]. The AMF shall include the same ngKSI in the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message to identify the new 5G NAS security context.

 If the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message can be accepted, the UE shall send a SECURITY MODE COMPLETE message integrity protected with the selected 5GS integrity algorithm and the 5G NAS integrity key based on the KAMF or mapped K'AMF if the type of security context flag is set to "mapped security context" indicated by the ngKSI. When the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message includes the type of security context flag set to "mapped security context" in the NAS key set identifier IE, then the UE shall check whether the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message indicates the ngKSI of the current 5GS security context, if it is a mapped 5G NAS security context, in order not to re-generate the K'AMF.

Furthermore, if the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message can be accepted, the UE shall cipher the SECURITY MODE COMPLETE message with the selected 5GS ciphering algorithm and the 5GS NAS ciphering key based on the KAMF or mapped K'AMF indicated by the ngKSI. The UE shall set the security header type of the message to "integrity protected and ciphered with new 5G NAS security context".

From this time onward the UE shall cipher and integrity protect all NAS signalling messages with the selected 5GS integrity and ciphering algorithms.

If the AMF indicated in the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message that the IMEISV is requested and:

a) if the UE:

1) supports at least one 3GPP access technology, the UE shall include its IMEISV in the IMEISV IE of the SECURITY MODE COMPLETE message; or

2) does not support any 3GPP access technology (i.e. satellite NG-RAN, NG-RAN, E-UTRAN, UTRAN or GERAN) and supports NAS over untrusted or trusted non-3GPP access, the UE shall include its EUI-64 in the non-IMEISV PEI IE of the SECURITY MODE COMPLETE message; or

b) if the 5G-RG contains neither an IMEISV nor an IMEI or when the W-AGF acts on behalf of the FN-RG (or on behalf of the N5GC device), the 5G-RG or the W-AGF acting on behalf of the FN-RG (or on behalf of the N5GC device) shall include the MAC address and the MAC address usage restriction indication determined as specified in subclause5.3.2 in the non-IMEISV PEI IE in the SECURITY MODE COMPLETE message.

If during an ongoing registration procedure or service request procedure, the UE receives a SECURITY MODE COMMAND message which includes the Additional 5G security information IE with the RINMR bit set to "Retransmission of the initial NAS message requested", the UE shall include the entire unciphered REGISTRATION REQUEST message or SERVICE REQUEST message or CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message, which the UE had previously included in the NAS message container IE of the initial NAS message (i.e. REGISTRATION REQUEST message or SERVICE REQUEST message or CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message, respectively), in the NAS message container IE of the SECURITY MODE COMPLETE message. The retransmitted CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message:

a) shall not include any non-cleartext IE, except the Uplink data status IE; and

b) may include the Uplink data status IE.

If, prior to receiving the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message, the UE without a valid 5G NAS security context had sent a REGISTRATION REQUEST message the UE shall include the entire REGISTRATION REQUEST message in the NAS message container IE of the SECURITY MODE COMPLETE message as described in subclause4.4.6.

If the UE operating in the single-registration mode receives the Selected EPS NAS security algorithms IE, the UE shall use the IE according to 3GPPTS33.501[24].

For a UE operating in single-registration mode in a network supporting N26 interface after an inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode, the UE shall set the value of the Selected EPS NAS security algorithms IE in the 5G NAS security context to the NAS security algorithms that were received from the source MME when the UE was in S1 mode.

5.4.2.4 NAS security mode control completion by the network

The AMF shall, upon receipt of the SECURITY MODE COMPLETE message, stop timer T3560. From this time onward the AMF shall integrity protect and encipher all signalling messages with the selected 5GS integrity and ciphering algorithms.

If the SECURITY MODE COMPLETE message contains a NAS message container IE with a REGISTRATION REQUEST message, the AMF shall complete the ongoing registration procedure by considering the REGISTRATION REQUEST message contained in the NAS message container IE as the message that triggered the procedure.

If the SECURITY MODE COMPLETE message contains a NAS message container IE with a REGISTRATION REQUEST message, the 5GMM capability IE included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message indicates "S1 mode supported" and the AMF supports N26 interface, the AMF shall initiate another NAS security mode control procedure in order to provide the selected EPS NAS security algorithms to the UE as described in subclause5.4.2.2. This second NAS security mode control procedure should be initiated as part of 5GMM common procedures of the ongoing registration procedure.

If the SECURITY MODE COMPLETE message contains a NAS message container IE with a SERVICE REQUEST message, the AMF shall complete the ongoing service request procedure by considering the SERVICE REQUEST message contained in the NAS message container IE as the message that triggered the procedure.

If the SECURITY MODE COMPLETE message contains a NAS message container IE with a CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message, the AMF shall complete the ongoing service request procedure by considering the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message contained in the NAS message container IE as the message that triggered the procedure.

5.4.2.5 NAS security mode command not accepted by the UE

If the security mode command cannot be accepted, the UE shall send a SECURITY MODE REJECT message. The SECURITY MODE REJECT message contains a 5GMM cause that typically indicates one of the following cause values:

#23 UE security capabilities mismatch.

#24 security mode rejected, unspecified.

If the UE detects that the received Replayed UE security capabilities IE has been altered compared to the latest values that the UE sent to the network, the UE shall set the cause value to #23 "UE security capabilities mismatch".

Upon receipt of the SECURITY MODE REJECT message, the AMF shall stop timer T3560. The AMF shall also abort the ongoing procedure that triggered the initiation of the NAS security mode control procedure.

Both the UE and the AMF shall apply the 5G NAS security context in use before the initiation of the security mode control procedure, if any, to protect the SECURITY MODE REJECT message and any other subsequent messages according to the rules in subclause4.4.4 and4.4.5.

5.4.2.6 Abnormal cases in the UE

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a) Transmission failure of SECURITY MODE COMPLETE message or SECURITY MODE REJECT message indication from lower layers (if the security mode control procedure is triggered by a registration procedure).

 The UE shall abort the security mode control procedure and re-initiate the registration procedure.

b) Transmission failure of SECURITY MODE COMPLETE message or SECURITY MODE REJECT message indication with change in the current TAI (if the security mode control procedure is triggered by a service request procedure).

 If the current TAI is not in the TAI list, the security mode control procedure shall be aborted and a registration procedure shall be initiated.

 If the current TAI is still part of the TAI list, the security mode control procedure shall be aborted and it is up to the UE implementation how to re-run the ongoing procedure that triggered the security mode control procedure.

c) Transmission failure of SECURITY MODE COMPLETE message or SECURITY MODE REJECT message indication without change in the current TAI (if the security mode control procedure is triggered by a service request procedure).

 The security mode control procedure shall be aborted and it is up to the UE implementation how to re-run the ongoing procedure that triggered the security mode control procedure.

5.4.2.7 Abnormal cases on the network side

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a) Lower layer failure before the SECURITY MODE COMPLETE or SECURITY MODE REJECT message is received.

 The network shall abort the security mode control procedure.

b) Expiry of timer T3560.

 The network shall, on the first expiry of the timer T3560, retransmit the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message and shall reset and start timer T3560. This retransmission is repeated four times, i.e. on the fifth expiry of timer T3560, the procedure shall be aborted.

c) Collision between security mode control procedure and registration, service request or de-registration procedure not indicating switch off.

 The network shall abort the security mode control procedure and proceed with the UE initiated procedure.

d) Collision between security mode control procedure and other 5GMM procedures than in itemc.

 The network shall progress both procedures.

e) Lower layers indication of non-delivered NAS PDU due to handover:

 If the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message could not be delivered due to an intra AMF handover and the target TA is included in the TAI list, then upon successful completion of the intra AMF handover the AMF shall retransmit the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message. If a failure of the handover procedure is reported by the lower layer and the N1 signalling connection exists, the AMF shall retransmit the SECURITY MODE COMMAND message.

5.4.3 Identification procedure

5.4.3.1 General

The purpose of this procedure is to request a particular UE to provide specific identification parameters, e.g. the SUCI, the IMEI, the IMEISV, the EUI-64 or the MAC address. The SUCI is a privacy preserving identifier containing the concealed SUPI and the IMEI, the IMEISV, the EUI-64 and the MAC address are formats of PEI.

5.4.3.2 Identification initiation by the network

The AMF initiates the identification procedure by sending an IDENTITY REQUEST message to the UE and starting timer T3570 (see example in figure5.4.3.2.1). The IDENTITY REQUEST message specifies the requested identification parameters in the Identity type information element.



Figure5.4.3.2.1: Identification procedure

5.4.3.3 Identification response by the UE

A UE shall be ready to respond to an IDENTITY REQUEST message at any time whilst in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode.

Upon receipt of the IDENTITY REQUEST message:

a) if the Identity type IE in the IDENTITY REQUEST message is not set to "SUCI", the UE shall send an IDENTITY RESPONSE message to the network. The IDENTITY RESPONSE message shall contain the identification parameters as requested by the network; and

b) if the Identity type IE in the IDENTITY REQUEST message is set to "SUCI", the UE shall:

1) if timer T3519 is not running, generate a fresh SUCI as specified in 3GPPTS33.501[24], send an IDENTITY RESPONSE message with the SUCI, start timer T3519 and store the value of the SUCI sent in the IDENTITY RESPONSE message; and

2) if timer T3519 is running, send an IDENTITY RESPONSE message with the stored SUCI.

5.4.3.4 Identification completion by the network

Upon receipt of the IDENTITY RESPONSE the network shall stop the timer T3570.

5.4.3.5 Abnormal cases in the UE

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a) Transmission failure of the IDENTITY RESPONSE message (if the identification procedure is triggered by a registration procedure).

 The UE shall re-initiate the registration procedure.

b) Requested identity is not available

 If the UE cannot encode the requested identity in the IDENTITY RESPONSE message, e.g. because no valid USIM is available, then it shall encode the identity type as "No identity".

5.4.3.6 Abnormal cases on the network side

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a) Lower layer failure.

 Upon detection of a lower layer failure before the IDENTITY RESPONSE is received, the network shall abort any ongoing 5GMM procedure.

b) Expiry of timer T3570.

 The network shall, on the first expiry of the timer T3570, retransmit the IDENTITY REQUEST message and reset and restart the timer T3570. This retransmission is repeated four times, i.e. on the fifth expiry of timer T3570, the network shall abort the identification procedure and any ongoing 5GMM procedure.

c) Collision of an identification procedure with a registration procedure for initial registration.

 If the network receives a REGISTRATION REQUEST message indicating either "initial registration" or "emergency registration" in the 5GS registration type IE before the ongoing identification procedure has been completed and no registration procedure is pending on the network (i.e. no REGISTRATION ACCEPT/REJECT message has still to be sent as an answer to a REGISTRATION REQUEST message), the network shall proceed with the registration procedure for initial registration.

d) Collision of an identification procedure with a registration procedure for initial registration when the identification procedure has been caused by a registration procedure for initial registration.

 If the network receives a REGISTRATION REQUEST message indicating either "initial registration" or "emergency registration" in the 5GS registration type IE before the ongoing identification procedure has been completed and a registration procedure for initial registration is pending (i.e. a REGISTRATION ACCEPT/REJECT message has to be sent as an answer to an earlier REGISTRATION REQUEST message), then:

- If one or more of the information elements in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message differ from the ones received within the previous REGISTRATION REQUEST message, the network shall proceed with the new registration procedure for initial registration; or

- If the information elements do not differ, then the network shall not treat any further this new REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

e) Collision of an identification procedure with a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update.

 If the network receives a REGISTRATION REQUEST message indicating either "mobility registration updating" or "periodic registration updating" in the 5GS registration type IE before the ongoing identification procedure has been completed, the network shall progress both procedures.

f) Collision of an identification procedure with a UE initiated de-registration procedure.

 If the network receives a DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message with "switch off" indication in the De-registration type IE before the ongoing identification procedure has been completed, the network shall abort the identification procedure and shall progress the UE-initiated de-registration procedure;

 Else the network shall complete the identification procedure and shall respond to the UE-initiated de-registration procedure as described in subclause5.5.2.2.

5.4.4 Generic UE configuration update procedure

5.4.4.1 General

The purpose of this procedure is to:

a) allow the AMF to update the UE configuration for access and mobility management-related parameters decided and provided by the AMF by providing new parameter information within the command;

b) request the UE to perform a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update towards the network to update access and mobility management-related parameters decided and provided by the AMF (see subclause5.5.1.3);

c) deliver the UAV authorization information to the UE, as described in 3GPPTS23.256[6AB]; or

d) update the PEIPS assistance information in the UE (see subclause5.3.25).

This procedure is initiated by the network and can only be used when the UE has an established 5GMM context, and the UE is in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode. When the UE is in 5GMM-IDLE mode, the AMF may use the paging or notification procedure to initiate the generic UE configuration update procedure. The AMF can request a confirmation response in order to ensure that the parameter has been updated by the UE.

This procedure shall be initiated by the network to assign a new 5G-GUTI to the UE after:

a) a successful service request procedure invoked as a response to a paging request from the network and before the:

1) release of the N1 NAS signalling connection; or

2) suspension of the N1 NAS signalling connection due to user plane CIoT 5GS optimization i.e. before the UE and the AMF enter 5GMM-IDLE mode with suspend indication; or

b) the AMF receives an indication from the lower layers that it has received the NGAP UE context resume request message as specified in 3GPPTS38.413[31] for a UE in 5GMM-IDLE mode with suspend indication and this resumption is a response to a paging request from the network, and before the:

1) release of the N1 NAS signalling connection; or

2) suspension of the N1 NAS signalling connection due to user plane CIoT 5GS optimization i.e. before the UE and the AMF enter 5GMM-IDLE mode with suspend indication.

If the service request procedure was triggered due to 5GSM downlink signalling pending, the procedure for assigning a new 5G-GUTI can be initiated by the network after the transport of the 5GSM downlink signalling.

The following parameters are supported by the generic UE configuration update procedure without the need to request the UE to perform the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update:

a) 5G-GUTI;

b) TAI list;

c) Service area list;

d) Network identity and time zone information (Full name for network, short name for network, local time zone, universal time and local time zone, network daylight saving time);

e) LADN information;

f) Rejected NSSAI;

g) void;

h) Operator-defined access category definitions;

i) SMS indication;

j) "CAG information list";

k) UE radio capability ID;

l) 5GS registration result;

m) Truncated 5G-S-TMSI configuration;

n) T3447 value;

o) "list of PLMN(s) to be used in disaster condition";

p) disaster roaming wait range;

q) disaster return wait range; and

r) PEIPS assistance information; and

s) Priority indicator.

The following parameters can be sent to the UE with or without a request to perform the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update:

a) Allowed NSSAI;

b) Configured NSSAI;

c) Network slicing subscription change indication; or

d) NSSRG information.

The following parameters are sent to the UE with a request to perform the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update:

a) MICO indication;

b) UE radio capability ID deletion indication; and

c) Additional configuration indication.

The following parameters can be included in the Service-level-AA container IE to be sent to the UE without a request to perform the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update:

a) Service-level device ID;

b) Service-level-AA payload type;

c) Service-level-AA payload; or

d) Service-level-AA response.

The following parameters are sent over 3GPP access only:

a) LADN information;

b) MICO indication;

c) TAI list;

d) Service area list;

e) "CAG information list";

f) UE radio capability ID;

g) UE radio capability ID deletion indication;

h) Truncated 5G-S-TMSI configuration;

i) Additional configuration indication;

j) T3447 value; and

k) Service-level-AA container.

The following parameters are managed and sent per access type i.e., independently over 3GPP access or non-3GPP access:

a) Allowed NSSAI;

b) Rejected NSSAI (when the NSSAI is rejected for the current registration area) or is rejected for the maximum number of UEs reached); and

c) If the UE is not registered to the same PLMN or SNPN over 3GPP and non-3GPP access:

- 5G-GUTI;

- Network identity and time zone information;

- Rejected NSSAI (when the NSSAI is rejected for the current PLMN or SNPN or rejected for the failed or revoked NSSAA);

- Configured NSSAI;

- NSSRG information;- SMS indication;

- 5GS registration result; and

- PEIPS assistance information.

If the UE is registered to the same PLMN or SNPN over 3GPP and non-3GPP access, the following parameters are managed commonly and sent over 3GPP access or non-3GPP access:

a) 5G-GUTI;

b) Network identity and time zone information;

c) Rejected NSSAI (when the NSSAI is rejected for the current PLMN or SNPN or rejected for the failed or revoked NSSAA);

d) Configured NSSAI;

e) SMS indication; and

f) 5GS registration result;

g) "list of PLMN(s) to be used in disaster condition";

h) disaster roaming wait range;

i) disaster return wait range;

j) PEIPS assistance information; and

k) NSSRG information;



Figure5.4.4.1.1: Generic UE configuration update procedure

5.4.4.2 Generic UE configuration update procedure initiated by the network

The AMF shall initiate the generic UE configuration update procedure by sending the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message to the UE.

The AMF shall in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message either:

a) include one or more of the following parameters: 5G-GUTI, TAI list, allowed NSSAI that may include the mapped S-NSSAI(s), LADN information, service area list, MICO indication, NITZ information, configured NSSAI that may include the mapped S-NSSAI(s), rejected S-NSSAI(s) in the Rejected NSSAI IE or in the Extended rejected NSSAI IE, network slicing subscription change indication, operator-defined access category definitions, SMS indication, service gap time value, "CAG information list", UE radio capability ID, 5GS registration result, UE radio capability ID deletion indication, truncated 5G-S-TMSI configuration, T3447 value, "list of PLMN(s) to be used in disaster condition", disaster roaming wait range, disaster return wait range, PEIPS assistance information or the priority indicator;

b) include the Configuration update indication IE with the Registration requested bit set to "registration requested"; or

c) include a combination of both a) and b).

If the UE is registering or registered for onboarding services in SNPN, the serving SNPN shall not provide the configured NSSAI, the allowed NSSAI or the rejected NSSAI to the UE.

If the UE supports extended rejected NSSAI, the rejected S-NSSAI(s) shall be included in the Extended rejected NSSAI IE. Otherwise the rejected S-NSSAI(s) shall be included in the Rejected NSSAI IE.

If an acknowledgement from the UE is requested, the AMF shall indicate "acknowledgement requested" in the Acknowledgement bit of the Configuration update indication IE in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message and shall start timer T3555. Acknowledgement shall be requested for all parameters except when only NITZ is included.

To initiate parameter re-negotiation between the UE and network, the AMF shall indicate "registration requested" in the Registration requested bit of the Configuration update indication IE in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message.

NOTE1: Generic UE configuration update procedure can be initiated by the AMF for updating the emergency number list, the extended emergency number list or both by indicating "registration requested" in the Registration requested bit of the Configuration update indication IE in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message to the UE.

If a new allowed NSSAI information or AMF re-configuration of supported S-NSSAIs requires an AMF relocation, the AMF shall indicate "registration requested" in the Registration requested bit of the Configuration update indication IE and include the Allowed NSSAI IE in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message.

If the AMF includes a new allowed NSSAI in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message and the subscription information includes the NSSRG information, then the S-NSSAIs of the allowed NSSAI shall be associated with at least one common NSSRG value.

If the AMF includes a new configured NSSAI in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message and the new configured NSSAI requires an AMF relocation as specified in 3GPPTS23.501[8], the AMF shall indicate "registration requested" in the Registration requested bit of the Configuration update indication IE in the message.

If the AMF includes a new configured NSSAI in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message, the subscription information includes the NSSRG information, and the UE has set the NSSRG bit in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message to:

a) "NSSRG supported", then the AMF shall include the NSSRG information in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message; or

b) "NSSRG not supported", then the configured NSSAI shall include one or more S-NSSAIs each of which is associated with all the NSSRG value(s) of the default S-NSSAI(s), or the configured NSSAI shall include, based on the indication received from the UDM as specified in 3GPPTS23.501[8], all subscribed S-NSSAIs even if these S-NSSAIs do not share any common NSSRG value.

If the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message is initiated only due to changes to the allowed NSSAI and these changes require the UE to initiate a registration procedure, but the AMF is unable to determine an allowed NSSAI for the UE as specified in 3GPPTS23.501[8], then the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message shall indicate "registration requested" in the Registration requested bit of the Configuration update indication IE, and shall not contain any other parameters.

If:

- the AMF needs to enforce a change in the restriction on the use of enhanced coverage or use of CE mode B as described in subclause5.3.18; or

- the AMF decides to inform a UE in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode and registered for disaster roaming services, that a disaster condition is no longer applicable;

NOTE1A: The case of the AMF triggering a generic UE configuration update procedure to inform a UE registered for disaster roaming services that a disaster condition is no longer applicable, is only applicable for a UE already in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode.

the AMF shall indicate "registration requested" in the Registration requested bit of the Configuration update indication IE and "release of N1 NAS signalling connection not required" in the Signalling connection maintain request bit of the Additional configuration indication IE in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message.

If a network slice-specific authentication and authorization procedure for an S-NSSAI is completed as a:

a) success, the AMF shall include this S-NSSAI in the allowed NSSAI over the same access of the requested S-NSSAI; or

b) failure, the AMF shall include this S-NSSAI in the rejected NSSAI for the failed or revoked NSSAA with the rejection cause "S-NSSAI not available due to the failed or revoked network slice-specific authentication and authorization" over either 3GPP access or non-3GPP access.

If authorization is revoked for an S-NSSAI that is in the current allowed NSSAI for an access type, the AMF shall:

a) provide a new allowed NSSAI to the UE, excluding the S-NSSAI for which authorization is revoked; and

b) provide a new rejected NSSAI for the failed or revoked NSSAA, including the S-NSSAI in the rejected NSSAI for which the authorization is revoked, with the rejection cause "S-NSSAI not available due to the failed or revoked network slice-specific authentication and authorization".

The allowed NSSAI and the rejected NSSAI shall be included in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message to reflect the result of the procedures subject to network slice-specific authentication and authorization.

NOTE2: If there are multiple S-NSSAIs subject to network slice-specific authentication and authorization, it is implementation specific if the AMF informs the UE about the outcome of the procedures in one or more CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND messages.

If the AMF includes the Network slicing indication IE in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message with the Network slicing subscription change indication set to "Network slicing subscription changed", and changes to the allowed NSSAI require the UE to initiate a registration procedure, but the AMF is unable to determine an allowed NSSAI for the UE as specified in 3GPPTS23.501[8], then the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message shall additionally indicate "registration requested" in the Registration requested bit of the Configuration update indication IE and shall not include an allowed NSSAI.

If EAC mode is activated for an S-NSSAI, the AMF shall perform NSAC for the S-NSSAI subject to NSAC before such S-NSSAI is included in the allowed NSSAI in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message. If EAC mode is deactivated for an S-NSSAI, the AMF shall perform NSAC for the S-NSSAI subject to NSAC after such S-NSSAI is included in the allowed NSSAI in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message.

If the UE supports extended rejected NSSAI and the AMF determines that maximum number of UEs reached for one or more S-NSSAI(s) in the allowed NSSAI as specified in subclause4.6.2.5, the AMF shall include the rejected NSSAI containing one or more S-NSSAIs with the rejection cause "S-NSSAI not available due to maximum number of UEs reached" in the Extended rejected NSSAI IE in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message. In addition, the AMF may include a back-off timer value for each S-NSSAI with the rejection cause "S-NSSAI not available due to maximum number of UEs reached" included in the Extended rejected NSSAI IE of the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message. To avoid that large numbers of UEs simultaneously initiate deferred requests, the network should select the value for the backoff  timer for each S-NSSAI for the informed UEs so that timeouts are not synchronised.

If the UE does not indicate support for extended rejected NSSAI and the maximum number of UEs has been reached, the AMF should include the rejected NSSAI containing one or more S-NSSAIs with the rejection cause "S-NSSAI not available in the current registration area" in the Rejected NSSAI IE and should not include these S-NSSAIs in the allowed NSSAI in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message. In addition, the AMF may based on the network policies start a local implementation specific timer for the UE per rejected S-NSSAI and upon expiration of the local implementation specific timer, the AMF may remove the rejected S-NSSAI from the rejected NSSAI and update to the UE by initiating the generic UE configuration update procedure.

NOTE3: Based on network policies, the AMF can include the S-NSSAI(s) for which the maximum number of UEs has been reached in the rejected NSSAI with rejection causes other than "S-NSSAI not available in the current registration area".

If the UE has set the NSAG bit to "NSAG supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, the AMF may include the NSAG information IE in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message.

If the AMF needs to update the LADN information, the AMF shall include the LADN information in the LADN information IE of the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message.

If the AMF needs to update the "CAG information list", the AMF shall include the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message. 

NOTE4: If the UE supports extended CAG information list, the CAG information list can be included either in the CAG information list IE or Extended CAG information list IE.

If the UE does not support extended CAG information list, the CAG information list shall not be included in the Extended CAG information list IE.

If the AMF needs to update the "CAG information list", the UE has an emergency PDU session, and the AMF can determine that the UE is in

a) a CAG cell and none of the CAG-ID(s) supported by the CAG cell is included in the "allowed CAG list" for the current PLMN in the updated "CAG information list"; or

b) a non-CAG cell and the entry for the current PLMN in the updated "CAG information list" includes an "indication that the UE is only allowed to access 5GS via CAG cells";

the AMF may indicate to the SMF to perform a local release of:

a) all non-emergency single access PDU sessions associated with 3GPP access;

b) all MA PDU sessions without a PDN connection established as a user-plane resource and without user plane resources established on non-3GPP access; and 

c) the 3GPP access user plane resources of all those MA PDU sessions with user plane resources established on both accesses.

The AMF shall not indicate to the SMF to release the emergency PDU session. If the AMF indicated to the SMF to perform a local release of:

a) all single access non-emergency PDU sessions associated with 3GPP access;

b) all MA PDU sessions without a PDN connection established as a user-plane resource and without user plane resources established on non-3GPP access; and

c) the 3GPP access user plane resources of all those MA PDU sessions with user plane resources established on both accesses;

the network shall behave as if the UE is registered for emergency services over 3GPP access and shall set the 5GS registration result IE value to "Registered for emergency services" in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message.

If the AMF is initiating the generic UE configuration update procedure to indicate to a UE which is registered for disaster roaming services, and which has an ongoing emergency PDU session, that the UE is registered for emergency services as described in subclause4.24, the AMF shall set the 5GS registration result IE value to "Registered for emergency services" in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message. 

If the AMF:

- updated the "CAG information list" to remove one or more CAG-ID(s) in the Allowed CAG list for the serving PLMN or an equivalent PLMN; or

- updated the "CAG information list" to set the "indication that the UE is only allowed to access 5GS via CAG cells" for the serving PLMN or an equivalent PLMN which was not set before,

then upon completion of the configuration update procedure and if the UE does not have an emergency PDU session, the AMF shall initiate the release of the N1 NAS signalling connection according to subclause5.3.1.3.

If the AMF needs to update the truncated 5G-S-TMSI configuration for a UE in NB-N1 mode using control plane CIoT 5GS optimization, the AMF shall include the Truncated 5G-S-TMSI configuration IE in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message.

If the AMF includes a UE radio capability ID deletion indication IE in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message, the AMF shall indicate "registration requested" in the Registration requested bit of the Configuration update indication IE.

If the AMF needs to redirect the UE to EPC as described in subclause4.8.4A.2, the AMF shall indicate "registration requested" in the Registration requested bit of the Configuration update indication IE and "release of N1 NAS signalling connection not required" in the Signalling connection maintain request bit of the Additional configuration indication IE in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message.

If the UE is not in NB-N1 mode and the UE supports RACS, the AMF may include either a UE radio capability ID IE or a UE radio capability ID deletion indication IE in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message.

During an established 5GMM context, the network may send none, one, or more CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND messages to the UE. If more than one CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message is sent, the messages need not have the same content.

Upon receipt of the result of the UUAA-MM procedure from the UAS-NF, the AMF shall include:

a) the service-level-AA response with the SLAR field set to:

1) "Service level authentication and authorization was successful" if the AMF detects the UUAA-MM procedure has succeeded; or

2) "Service level authentication and authorization was not successful or service level authorization is revoked" if the AMF detects the UUAA-MM procedure has failed;

b) if the CAA-Level UAV ID is provided by the UAS-NF, the service-level device ID with the value set to the CAA-Level UAV ID; and;

c) if the UUAA authorization payload is received from the UAS-NF:

1) the service-level-AA payload type, with the values set to "UUAA payload"; and

2) the service-level-AA payload, with the value set to the UUAA payload;

in the Service-level-AA container IE of the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message.

NOTE5: UAS security information can be included in the UUAA payload by the USS as specified in 3GPPTS33.256[24B].

NOTE6: If the AMF receives the HTTP code set to "4xx" or "5xx" as specified in 3GPPTS29.500[20AA] or the AMF detects that the UUAA-MM failure as specified in 3GPPTS29.256[21B], then the AMF considers the UUAA-MM procedure has failed.

If the AMF needs to deliver to the UE the UUAA revocation notification received from the UAS-NF, the AMF shall include the service-level-AA response with SLAR set to "Service level authentication and authorization was not successful or service level authorization is revoked" in the Service-level-AA container IE of the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message.

If the UE supports MINT, the AMF may include the List of PLMNs to be used in disaster condition IE in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message.

If the UE supports MINT, the AMF may include the Disaster roaming wait range IE in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message.

If the UE supports MINT, the AMF may include the Disaster return wait range IE in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message.

NOTE7: The AMF can determine the content of the "list of PLMN(s) to be used in disaster condition", the value of the disaster roaming wait range and the value of the disaster return wait range based on the network local configuration.

If the UE supports and the network supports and accepts the use of the PEIPS assistance information, and the AMF needs to update the PEIPS assistance information, the AMF may include the PEIPS assistance information in the Updated PEIPS assistance information IE of the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message.

If the AMF needs to inform the UE that the use of access identity 1 is valid or is no longer valid, the AMF informs the UE by setting the MPS indicator bit of the Priority indicator IE to "Access identity 1 valid" or "Access identity 1 not valid" respectively, in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message. Based on operator policy, the AMF sets the MPS indicator bit in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message based on the MPS priority information in the user's subscription context obtained from the UDM.

5.4.4.3 Generic UE configuration update accepted by the UE

Upon receiving the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message, the UE shall stop timer T3346 if running and use the contents to update appropriate information stored within the UE.

If "acknowledgement requested" is indicated in the Acknowledgement bit of the Configuration update indication IE in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message, the UE shall send a CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMPLETE message.

If the UE receives a new 5G-GUTI in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message, the UE shall consider the new 5G-GUTI as valid, the old 5G-GUTI as invalid, stop timer T3519 if running, and delete any stored SUCI; otherwise, the UE shall consider the old 5G-GUTI as valid. The UE shall provide the 5G-GUTI to the lower layer of 3GPP access if the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message is sent over the non-3GPP access, and the UE is in 5GMM-REGISTERED in both 3GPP access and non-3GPP access in the same PLMN.

If the UE receives a new TAI list in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message, the UE shall consider the new TAI list as valid and the old TAI list as invalid; otherwise, the UE shall consider the old TAI list as valid. If the registration area contains TAIs belonging to different PLMNs, which are equivalent PLMNs, and

a) the UE already has stored allowed NSSAI for the current registration area, the UE shall store the allowed NSSAI for the current registration area in each of the allowed NSSAIs which are associated with each of the PLMNs in the registration area; and

b) the UE already has stored rejected NSSAI for the current registration area, the UE shall store the rejected NSSAI for the current registration area in each of the rejected NSSAIs which are associated with each of the PLMNs in the registration area.

If the UE receives a new truncated 5G-S-TMSI configuration in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message, the UE shall consider the new truncated 5G-S-TMSI configuration as valid and the old truncated 5G-S-TMSI configuration as invalid; otherwise, the UE shall consider the old truncated 5G-S-TMSI configuration as valid.

If the UE receives a new service area list in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message, the UE shall consider the new service area list as valid and the old service area list as invalid; otherwise, the UE shall consider the old service area list, if any, as valid.

If the UE receives new NITZ information in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message, the UE considers the new NITZ information as valid and the old NITZ information as invalid; otherwise, the UE shall consider the old NITZ information as valid.

If the UE receives a LADN information IE in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message, the UE shall consider the old LADN information as invalid and the new LADN information as valid, if any; otherwise, the UE shall consider the old LADN information as valid.

If the UE receives a new allowed NSSAI for the associated access type in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message, the UE shall consider the new allowed NSSAI as valid for the associated access type, store the allowed NSSAI for the associated access type as specified in subclause4.6.2.2 and consider the old allowed NSSAI for the associated access type as invalid; otherwise, the UE shall consider the old allowed NSSAI as valid for the associated access type.

If the UE receives a new configured NSSAI in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message, the UE shall consider the new configured NSSAI for the registered PLMN or SNPN as valid and the old configured NSSAI for the registered PLMN or SNPN as invalid; otherwise, the UE shall consider the old configured NSSAI for the registered PLMN or SNPN as valid The UE shall store the new configured NSSAI as specified in subclause4.6.2.2. In addition, if the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message contains an NSSRG information IE, the UE shall store the contents of the NSSRG information IE as specified in subclause4.6.2.2.

If the UE receives the Network slicing indication IE in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message with the Network slicing subscription change indication set to "Network slicing subscription changed", the UE shall delete the network slicing information for each and every PLMN except for the current PLMN as specified in subclause4.6.2.2.

If the UE receives Operator-defined access category definitions IE in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message and the Operator-defined access category definitions IE contains one or more operator-defined access category definitions, the UE shall delete any operator-defined access category definitions stored for the RPLMN and shall store the received operator-defined access category definitions for the RPLMN. If the UE receives the Operator-defined access category definitions IE in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message and the Operator-defined access category definitions IE contains no operator-defined access category definitions, the UE shall delete any operator-defined access category definitions stored for the RPLMN. If the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message does not contain the Operator-defined access category definitions IE, the UE shall not delete the operator-defined access category definitions stored for the RPLMN.

If the UE receives the SMS indication IE in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message with the SMS availability indication set to:

a) "SMS over NAS not available", the UE shall consider that SMS over NAS transport is not allowed by the network; and

b) "SMS over NAS available", the UE may request the use of SMS over NAS transport by performing a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update as specified in subclause5.5.1.3, after the completion of the generic UE configuration update procedure.

If the UE receives the CAG information list IE in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message, the UE shall:

a) replace the "CAG information list" stored in the UE with the received CAG information list IE when received in the HPLMN or EHPLMN;

NOTE1: When the UE receives the CAG information list IE in the HPLMN derived from the IMSI, the EHPLMN list is present and is not empty and the HPLMN is not present in the EHPLMN list, the UE behaves as if it receives the CAG information list IE in a VPLMN.

b) replace the serving VPLMN's entry of the "CAG information list" stored in the UE with the serving VPLMN's entry of the received CAG information list IE when the UE receives the CAG information list IE in a serving PLMN other than the HPLMN or EHPLMN; or

NOTE2: When the UE receives the CAG information list IE in a serving PLMN other than the HPLMN or EHPLMN, entries of a PLMN other than the serving VPLMN, if any, in the received CAG information list IE are ignored.

c) remove the serving VPLMN's entry of the "CAG information list" stored in the UE when the UE receives the CAG information list IE in a serving PLMN other than the HPLMN or EHPLMN and the CAG information list IE does not contain the serving VPLMN's entry.

The UE shall store the "CAG information list" received in the CAG information list IE as specified in annexC.

If the received "CAG information list" includes an entry containing the identity of the current PLMN and the UE had set the CAG bit to "CAG supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, the UE shall operate as follows.

a) If the UE receives the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message via a CAG cell, the entry for the current PLMN in the received "CAG information list" does not include any of the CAG-ID(s) supported by the current CAG cell, and:

1) the entry for the current PLMN in the received "CAG information list" does not include an "indication that the UE is only allowed to access 5GS via CAG cells", then the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE and shall search for a suitable cell according to 3GPPTS38.304[28] or 3GPPTS36.304[25C] with the updated "CAG information list"; or

2) the entry for the current PLMN in the received "CAG information list" includes an "indication that the UE is only allowed to access 5GS via CAG cells" and:

i) if the entry for the current PLMN in the received "CAG information list" includes one or more CAG-IDs, the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE and shall search for a suitable cell according to 3GPPTS38.304[28] with the updated "CAG information list"; or

ii) if the entry for the current PLMN in the received "CAG information list" does not include any CAG-ID and:

A) the UE does not have an emergency PDU session, then the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH and shall apply the PLMN selection process defined in 3GPP TS 23.122 [5] with the updated "CAG information list"; or

B) the UE has an emergency PDU session, then the UE shall perform a local release of all PDU sessions associated with 3GPP access except for the emergency PDU session and enter the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE; or

b) If the UE receives the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message via a non-CAG cell and the entry for the current PLMN in the received "CAG information list" includes an "indication that the UE is only allowed to access 5GS via CAG cells" and:

1) if the "allowed CAG list" for the current PLMN in the received "CAG information list" includes one or more CAG-IDs, the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE and shall search for a suitable cell according to 3GPPTS38.304[28] with the updated "CAG information list"; or

2) if the entry for the current PLMN in the received "CAG information list" does not include any CAG-ID and:

i) the UE does not have an emergency PDU session, then the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH and shall apply the PLMN selection process defined in 3GPP TS 23.122 [5] with the updated "CAG information list"; or

ii) the UE has an emergency PDU session, then the UE shall perform a local release of all PDU sessions associated with 3GPP access except for the emergency PDU session and enter the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE.

If the received "CAG information list" does not include an entry containing the identity of the current PLMN and the UE receives the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message via a CAG cell, the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE and shall search for a suitable cell according to 3GPPTS38.304[28] or 3GPPTS36.304[25C] with the updated "CAG information list".

If the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message indicates "registration requested" in the Registration requested bit of the Configuration update indication IE and:

a) contains no other parameters or contains at least one of the following parameters: a new allowed NSSAI, a new configured NSSAI or the Network slicing subscription change indication, and:

1) an emergency PDU session exists, the UE shall, after the completion of the generic UE configuration update procedure and the release of the emergency PDU session, release the existing N1 NAS signalling connection. If any Tsor-cm timer(s) were running and have stopped, the UE shall attempt to obtain service on a higher priority PLMN (see 3GPPTS23.122[5]). Otherwise the UE start a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update as specified in subclause5.5.1.3; or

2) no emergency PDU Session exists, the UE shall, after the completion of the generic UE configuration update procedure and the release of the existing N1 NAS signalling connection. If any Tsor-cm timer(s) were running and have stopped, the UE shall attempt to obtain service on a higher priority PLMN (see 3GPPTS23.122[5]). Otherwise the UE start a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update as specified in subclause5.5.1.3;

b) a MICO indication is included without a new allowed NSSAI; a new configured NSSAI or the Network slicing subscription change indication, the UE shall, after the completion of the generic UE configuration update procedure, start a registration procedure for mobility and registration update as specified in subclause5.5.1.3 to re-negotiate MICO mode with the network;

c) an Additional configuration indication IE is included, and:

1) "release of N1 NAS signalling connection not required" is indicated in the Signalling connection maintain request bit of the Additional configuration indication IE; and

2) a new allowed NSSAI, a new configured NSSAI and the Network slicing subscription change indication is not included in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message,

 the UE shall, after the completion of the generic UE configuration update procedure, start a registration procedure for mobility and registration update as specified in subclause5.5.1.3; or

d) a UE radio capability ID deletion indication IE set to "Network-assigned UE radio capability IDs deletion requested" is included, and:

1) the UE is not in NB-N1 mode;

2) a new allowed NSSAI, a new configured NSSAI or a Network slicing subscription change indication is not included; and

3) the UE has set the RACS bit to "RACS supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message,

 the UE shall, after the completion of the generic UE configuration update procedure, start a registration procedure for mobility and registration update as specified in subclause5.5.1.3.

The UE receiving the rejected NSSAI in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message takes the following actions based on the rejection cause in the rejected S-NSSAI(s):

"S-NSSAI not available in the current PLMN or SNPN"

 The UE shall add the rejected S-NSSAI(s) in the rejected NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN as specified in subclause4.6.2.2 and shall not attempt to use this S-NSSAI(s) in the current PLMN or SNPN until switching off the UE, the UICC containing the USIM is removed, the entry of the "list of subscriber data" with the SNPN identity of the current SNPN is updated, or the rejected S-NSSAI(s) are removed or deleted as described in subclause4.6.2.2.

"S-NSSAI not available in the current registration area"

 The UE shall add the rejected S-NSSAI(s) in the rejected NSSAI for the current registration area as specified in subclause4.6.2.2 and shall not attempt to use this S-NSSAI(s) in the current registration area until switching off the UE, the UE moving out of the current registration area, the UICC containing the USIM is removed, the entry of the "list of subscriber data" with the SNPN identity of the current SNPN is updated, or the rejected S-NSSAI(s) are removed or deleted as described in subclause4.6.2.2.

"S-NSSAI not available due to the failed or revoked network slice-specific authentication and authorization"

 The UE shall add the rejected S-NSSAI(s) in the rejected NSSAI for the failed or revoked NSSAA as specified in subclause4.6.2.2 and shall not attempt to use this S-NSSAI in the current PLMN or SNPN over any access until switching off the UE, the UICC containing the USIM is removed, the entry of the "list of subscriber data" with the SNPN identity of the current SNPN is updated, or the rejected S-NSSAI(s) are removed or deleted as described in subclause4.6.1 and 4.6.2.2.

"S-NSSAI not available due to maximum number of UEs reached"

 Unless the back-off timer value received along with the S-NSSAI is zero, the UE shall add the rejected S-NSSAI(s) in the rejected NSSAI for the maximum number of UEs reached as specified in subclause4.6.2.2 and shall not attempt to use this S-NSSAI in the current PLMN or SNPN over the current access until switching off the UE, the UICC containing the USIM is removed, the entry of the "list of subscriber data" with the SNPN identity of the current SNPN is updated, or the rejected S-NSSAI(s) are removed as described in subclause4.6.2.2.

NOTE3: If the back-off timer value received along with the S-NSSAI in the rejected NSSAI for the maximum number of UEs reached is zero as specified in subclause10.5.7.4a of TS24.008, the UE does not consider the S-NSSAI as the rejected S-NSSAI.

If there is one or more S-NSSAIs in the rejected NSSAI with the rejection cause "S-NSSAI not available due to maximum number of UEs reached", then for each S-NSSAI, the UE shall behave as follows:

a) stop the timer T3526 associated with the S-NSSAI, if running;

b) start the timer T3526 with:

1) the back-off timer value received along with the S-NSSAI, if back-off timer value is received along with the S-NSSAI that is neither zero nor deactivated; or

2) an implementation specific back-off timer value, if no back-off timer value is received along with the S-NSSAI; and

c) remove the S-NSSAI from the rejected NSSAI for the maximum number of UEs reached when the timer T3526 associated with the S-NSSAI expires.

If the UE receives the NSAG information IE in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message, the UE shall store the NSAG information as specified in subclause 4.6.2.2.

If the UE receives a T3447 value IE in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message and has indicated "service gap control supported" in the REGISTRATION REQUEST, then the UE shall replace the stored T3447 value with the received value in the T3447 value IE, and if neither zero nor deactivated use the received T3447 value with the timer T3447 next time it is started. If the received T3447 value is zero or deactivated, then the UE shall stop the timer T3447 if running.

If the UE is not in NB-N1 mode, the UE has set the RACS bit to "RACS supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message includes:

a) a UE radio capability ID deletion indication IE set to "Network-assigned UE radio capability IDs deletion requested", the UE shall delete any network-assigned UE radio capability IDs associated with the RPLMN or RSNPN and, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription stored at the UE; or

b) a UE radio capability ID IE, the UE shall store the UE radio capability ID as specified in annexC.

If the UE is not currently registered for emergency services and the 5GS registration result IE value in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message is set to "Registered for emergency services", the UE shall consider itself registered for emergency services and shall locally release all non-emergency PDU sessions, if any.

If the UE receives the service-level-AA container IE of the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message, the UE passes it to the upper layer.

If the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message includes the service-level-AA response in the Service-level-AA container IE with the SLAR field set to "Service level authentication and authorization was not successful or service level authorization is revoked", the UE shall forward the service-level-AA response to the upper layers, so the UUAA authorization data is deleted as specified in 3GPPTS33.256[24B].

If the UE receives the List of PLMNs to be used in disaster condition IE in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message and the UE supports MINT, the UE shall delete the "list of PLMN(s) to be used in disaster condition" stored in the ME together with the PLMN ID of the RPLMN, if any, and may store the "list of PLMN(s) to be used in disaster condition" included in the List of PLMNs to be used in disaster condition IE in the ME together with the PLMN ID of the RPLMN.

If the UE receives the Disaster roaming wait range IE in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message and the UE supports MINT, the UE shall delete the disaster roaming wait range stored in the ME, if any, and store the disaster roaming wait range included in the Disaster roaming wait range IE in the ME.

If the UE receives the Disaster return wait range IE in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message and the UE supports MINT, the UE shall delete the disaster roaming wait range stored in the ME, if any, and store the disaster roaming wait range included in the Disaster roaming wait range IE in the ME.

If the UE receives the Updated PEIPS assistance information IE in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message and the UE supports NR paging subgrouping, the UE shall use the PEIPS assistance information included in the Updated PEIPS assistance information IE.

If the UE receives a CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message with the MPS indicator bit set to "Access identity 1 valid", the UE shall act as a UE with access identity 1 configured for MPS as described in subclause4.5.2, in all NG-RAN of the registered PLMN and its equivalent PLMNs or in the case of SNPN, as described in subclause4.5.2A, in all NG-RAN of the registered SNPN. The MPS indicator bit in the Priority indicator IE provided in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message is valid until the UE receives a REGISTRATION ACCEPT message with the MPS indicator bit set to "Access identity 1 not valid" or the UE receives a CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message with the MPS indicator bit of the Priority indicator IE set to "Access identity 1 not valid" or until the UE selects a non-equivalent PLMN (or in the case of SNPN, selects another SNPN). Access identity 1 is only applicable while the UE is in N1 mode.

5.4.4.4 Generic UE configuration update completion by the network

Upon receipt of the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMPLETE message, the AMF shall stop the timer T3555.

If a new 5G-GUTI was included in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message, the AMF shall consider the new 5G-GUTI as valid and the old 5G-GUTI as invalid.

If a new TAI list was included in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message, the AMF shall consider the new TAI list as valid and the old TAI list as invalid.

If a new truncated 5G-S-TMSI configuration was included in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message, the AMF shall consider the new truncated 5G-S-TMSI configuration as valid and the old truncated 5G-S-TMSI configuration as invalid.

If a new service area list was included in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message, the AMF shall consider the new service area list as valid and the old service area list as invalid.

If new allowed NSSAI information was included in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message, the AMF shall consider the new allowed NSSAI information as valid and the old allowed NSSAI information as invalid. If new configured NSSAI information was included in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message, the AMF shall consider the new configured NSSAI information as valid and the old configured information as invalid. If there are active PDU sessions associated with S-NSSAI(s) not included in the new allowed NSSAI, the AMF shall notify the SMF(s) associated with these PDU sessions to initiate the network-requested PDU session release procedure according to subclause6.3.3 in the present specification and subclause5.15.5.2.2 in 3GPPTS23.501[8].

If "registration requested" was indicated in the Registration requested bit of the Configuration update indication IE in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message and:

a) the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message contained:

1) an allowed NSSAI, a configured NSSAI or both;

2) the Network slicing indication IE with the Network slicing subscription change indication set to "Network slicing subscription changed"; or

3) no other parameters; and

b) no emergency PDU session has been established for the UE;

then the AMF shall initiate the release of the N1 NAS signalling connection.

If a LADN information IE was included in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message, the AMF shall consider the old LADN information as invalid and the new LADN information as valid, if any. In this case, if the tracking area identity list in the new LADN information does not include the current TA, the AMF shall indicate UE presence in LADN service area to the SMF (see 3GPPTS23.501[8] and 3GPPTS23.502[9]).

If a T3447 value was included in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message, the AMF shall consider the T3447 value as valid and if neither zero nor deactivated use the T3447 value with the timer T3447 next time it is started. If the T3447 value included in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message contained an indication that the timer is deactivated or timer value zero, then the AMF shall stop the timer T3447 if running.

If a CAG information IE was included in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message, the AMF shall consider the new "CAG information list" as valid and the old "CAG information list" as invalid.

If a UE radio capability ID IE was included in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message, the AMF shall consider the new UE radio capability ID as valid and the old UE radio capability ID as invalid.

If an Updated PEIPS assistance information IE was included in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message, the AMF shall consider the new PEIPS assistance information as valid and the old PEIPS assistance information, if any, as invalid.

5.4.4.5 Abnormal cases in the UE

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a) Transmission failure of the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMPLETE message with TAI change from lower layers

 If the current TAI is not in the TAI list, the generic UE configuration update procedure shall be aborted and a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update shall be initiated.

 If the current TAI is still part of the TAI list, it is up to the UE implementation how to re-run the ongoing procedure that triggered the generic UE configuration update procedure.

b) Transmission failure of CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMPLETE message indication without TAI change from lower layers

 It is up to the UE implementation how to re-run the ongoing procedure that triggered the generic UE configuration update procedure.

c) Generic UE configuration update and de-registration procedure collision

 If the UE receives CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message after sending a DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message and the access type included in the DEREGISTRATION REQEUST message is same as the access in which the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message is received, then the UE shall ignore the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message and proceed with the de-registration procedure. Otherwise, the UE shall proceed with both the procedures.

d) Void

e) Generic UE configuration update and service request procedure collision

 If the SERVICE REQUEST message does not include UE request type IE with Request type value set to "NAS signalling connection release" and the UE receives a CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message before the ongoing service request procedure has been completed, the UE shall proceed with both the procedures.

 If the SERVICE REQUEST message includes UE request type IE with Request type value set to "NAS signalling connection release" and the UE receives a CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message before the ongoing service request procedure has been completed, the UE shall ignore the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message and proceed with the service request procedure.

f) "CAG information list" is received and the UE is operating in SNPN access operation mode

 If the UE receives the CAG information list IE in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message and the UE is operating in SNPN access operation mode, the UE shall ignore the content of CAG information list IE.

5.4.4.6 Abnormal cases on the network side

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a) Expiry of timer T3555.

 The network shall, on the first expiry of the timer T3555, retransmit the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message and shall reset and start timer T3555. This retransmission is repeated four times, i.e. on the fifth expiry of timer T3555, the procedure shall be aborted. In addition, if the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message includes the 5G-GUTI IE, the network shall behave as described in caseb)-1) below.

b) Lower layer failure.

 If a lower layer failure is detected before the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMPLETE message is received and:

1) if the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message includes the 5G-GUTI IE, the old and the new 5G-GUTI shall be considered as valid until the old 5G-GUTI can be considered as invalid by the AMF. If a new TAI list was provided in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message, the old and new TAI list shall also be considered as valid until the old TAI list can be considered as invalid by the AMF.

 Additionally, if the Updated PEIPS assistance information IE in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message includes a new Paging subgroup ID and the UE is previously assigned a different Paging subgroup ID then, the AMF shall consider both, the old and new Paging subgroup IDs as valid until the old Paging subgroup ID can be considered as invalid by the AMF.

During this period the AMF:

i) may first use the old 5G-S-TMSI from the old 5G-GUTI and the old Paging subgroup ID, if any, for paging within the area defined by the old TAI list for an implementation dependent number of paging attempts for network originated transactions. If a new TAI list was provided in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message, the new TAI list should also be used for paging. Upon response from the UE, the AMF may re-initiate the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND. If the Updated PEIPS assistance information IE in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message includes a new Paging subgroup ID, then the AMF may re-initiate the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND. If the response is received from a tracking area within the old and new TAI list, the network shall re-initiate the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message. If no response is received to the paging attempts, the network may use the new 5G-S-TMSI from the new 5G-GUTI and the new Paging subgroup ID, if any, for paging for an implementation dependent number of paging attempts. In this case, if a new TAI list was provided with new 5G-GUTI in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message, the new TAI list shall be used instead of the old TAI list. Upon response from the UE the AMF shall consider the new 5G-GUTI and the new PEIPS assistance information as valid and the old 5G-GUTI and the old PEIPS assistance information as invalid.

ii) shall consider the new 5G-GUTI as valid if it is used by the UE and, additionally, the new TAI list as valid if it was provided with this 5G-GUTI in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message; and

iii) may use the identification procedure followed by a new generic UE configuration update procedure if the UE uses the old 5G-GUTI; or

2) if the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message does not include the 5G-GUTI IE and:

i) the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message does not contain the Allowed NSSAI IE, the Rejected NSSAI IE, the Extended rejected NSSAI IE, or the Updated PEIPS assistance information IE, the network shall abort the procedure; or

ii) the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message contains the Allowed NSSAI IE, the Rejected NSSAI IE, the Extended rejected NSSAI IE, or the Updated PEIPS assistance information IE, the network shall either abort the procedure or retransmit the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message on expiry of the timer T3555. The retransmission shall not be repeated more than four times. If the retransmission is repeated for four times, the network shall abort the procedure.

c) Generic UE configuration update and UE initiated de-registration procedure collision.

 If the network receives a DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message before the ongoing generic UE configuration update procedure has been completed, the network shall abort the generic UE configuration update procedure and shall progress the de-registration procedure.

d) Generic UE configuration update and registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update collision

 If the network receives a REGISTRATION REQUEST message before the ongoing generic UE configuration update procedure has been completed, the network shall abort the generic UE configuration update procedure and shall progress the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update procedure.

e) Generic UE configuration update and service request procedure collision

 If the network receives a SERVICE REQUEST message before the ongoing generic UE configuration update procedure has been completed and the SERVICE REQUEST message does not include UE request type IE with Request type value set to "NAS signalling connection release", both the procedures shall be progressed.

 If the network receives a SERVICE REQUEST message before the ongoing generic UE configuration update procedure has been completed and the SERVICE REQUEST message includes UE request type IE with Request type value set to "NAS signalling connection release", the network shall abort the generic UE configuration update procedure and shall progress the service request procedure.

5.4.5 NAS transport procedure(s)

5.4.5.1 General

The purpose of the NAS transport procedures is to provide a transport of payload between the UE and the AMF. The type of the payload is identified by the Payload container type IE and includes one of the following:

a) a single 5GSM message;

b) SMS;

c) an LPP message (see 3GPPTS37.355[26]);

d) an SOR transparent container;

e) a UE policy container;

f) a UE parameters update transparent container;

g) a location services message (see 3GPPTS24.080[13A]);

h) a CIoT user data container;

i) a Service-level-AA container; or

j) Multiple payloads.

For payload type a) to e), g) and h), along with the payload, the NAS transport procedure may transport the associated information (e.g. PDU session information for 5GSM message payload).

For payload type j), the Payload container IE consists a list of payload container entries, where each of payload container entry contains the payload and optional associated information (e.g. PDU session information for 5GSM message payload).

NOTE: Payload type can be set to "Multiple payloads" if there are more than one payloads to be transported using the NAS transport procedures.

5.4.5.2 UE-initiated NAS transport procedure

5.4.5.2.1 General

The purpose of the UE-initiated NAS transport procedure is to provide a transport of:

a) a single 5GSM message as defined in subclause8.3;

b) SMS (see 3GPPTS24.011[13]);

c) an LPP message;

d) an SOR transparent container;

e) a UE policy container; or

f) a UE parameters update transparent container;

g) a location services message;

h) a CIoT user data container;

i) a Service-level-AA container; or

j) multiple of the above types.

and:

- for a) to e), g) and h), optional associated payload routing information from the UE to the AMF in a 5GMM message; and

- for j), the Payload container IE consists a list of payload container entries, where each of the payload container entry contains the payload and optional associated payload routing information (e.g. PDU session information for 5GSM message payload).

5.4.5.2.2 UE-initiated NAS transport procedure initiation

In the connected mode, the UE initiates the NAS transport procedure by sending the UL NAS TRANSPORT message to the AMF, as shown in figure5.4.5.2.2.1.

In case a) in subclause5.4.5.2.1, the UE shall:

- include the PDU session information (PDU session ID, old PDU session ID, S-NSSAI, mapped S-NSSAI (if available in roaming scenarios), DNN, request type), if available;

- set the Payload container type IE to "N1 SM information"; and

- set the Payload container IE to the 5GSM message.

The UE shall set the PDU session ID IE to the PDU session ID. If an old PDU session ID is to be included, the UE shall set the Old PDU session ID IE to the old PDU session ID.

If an S-NSSAI is to be included, the UE shall set the S-NSSAI IE to the S-NSSAI selected for the PDU session from the allowed NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN, associated with the mapped S-NSSAI (if available in roaming scenarios).

If a DNN is to be included, the UE shall set the DNN IE to the DNN. 5GSM procedures specified in clause6 describe conditions for inclusion of the S-NSSAI, mapped S-NSSAI (if available in roaming scenarios), and the DNN.

If a request type is to be included, the UE shall set the Request type IE to the request type. The request type is not provided along 5GSM messages other than the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message and the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message.

If an MA PDU session information is to be included, the UE shall set the MA PDU session information IE to the MA PDU session information. The MA PDU session information is not provided along 5GSM messages other than the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message and the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message as specified in 3GPPTS24.193[13B].

In case b) in subclause5.4.5.2.1, the UE shall:

- set the Payload container type IE to "SMS"; and

- set the Payload container IE to the SMS payload.

Based on the UE preferences regarding access selection for mobile originated (MO) transmission of SMS over NAS as described in 3GPPTS23.501[8]:

- when SMS over NAS is preferred to be sent over 3GPP access: the UE attempts to deliver MO SMS over NAS via the 3GPP access if the UE is registered over both 3GPP access and non-3GPP access. If the delivery of SMS over NAS via the 3GPP access is not available, the UE attempts to deliver MO SMS over NAS via the non-3GPP access; and

- when SMS over NAS is preferred to be sent over non-3GPP access: the UE attempts to deliver MO SMS over NAS via the non-3GPP access if the UE is registered over both 3GPP access and non-3GPP access. If the delivery of SMS over NAS via the non-3GPP access is not available, the UE attempts to deliver MO SMS over NAS via the 3GPP access.

In case c) in subclause5.4.5.2.1, the UE shall:

- set the Payload container type IE to "LTE Positioning Protocol (LPP) message container";

- set the Payload container IE to the LPP message payload; and

- set the Additional information IE to the routing information provided by the upper layer location services application.

In case d) in subclause5.4.5.2.1, the UE shall:

- set the Payload container type IE to "SOR transparent container"; and

- set the Payload container IE to the UE acknowledgement due to successful reception of steering of roaming information, and set the ME support of SOR-CMCI indicator to "SOR-CMCI supported by the ME" in the Payload container IE carrying the acknowledgement (see 3GPPTS23.122[5]).

In case e) in subclause5.4.5.2.1, the UE shall:

- set the Payload container type IE to "UE policy container"; and

- set the contents of the Payload container IE as specified in AnnexD.

In case f) in subclause5.4.5.2.1, the UE shall:

- set the Payload container type IE to "UE parameters update transparent container"; and

- set the contents of the Payload container IE to the UE acknowledgement due to successful reception of UE parameters update data (see 3GPPTS23.502[9]).

In case g) in subclause5.4.5.2.1, the UE shall:

- set the Payload container type IE to "Location services message container";

- set the Payload container IE to the Location services message payload; and

- set the Additional information IE to the routing information, if provided by the upper layer location services application.

In case h) in subclause5.4.5.2.1, the UE shall:

- include the PDU session ID, and Release assistance indication (if available);

- set the Payload container type IE to "CIoT user data container"; and

- set the Payload container IE to the user data container.

In case i) in subclause5.4.5.2.1, the UE shall:

- set the Payload container type IE to "Service-level-AA container"; and

- set the Payload container IE to the Service-level-AA container.

In case j) in subclause5.4.5.2.1, the UE shall:

- set the Payload container type IE to "Multiple payloads"; and

- set each payload container entry of the Payload container IE (see subclause9.11.3.39), as follows:

i) set the payload container type field of the payload container entry to a payload container type value set in the Payload container type IE as specified in cases a) to i) above;

ii) set the payload container entry contents field of the payload container entry to the payload container contents set in the Payload container IE as specified in cases a) to i) above, and

iii) set the optional IE fields, if any, to the optional associated payload routing information as specified in cases a) to i) above.



Figure5.4.5.2.2.1: UE-initiated NAS transport procedure

5.4.5.2.3 UE-initiated NAS transport of messages accepted by the network

Upon reception of a UL NAS TRANSPORT message, if the Payload container type IE is set to:

a) "N1 SM information", the AMF looks up a PDU session routing context for:

1) the UE and the PDU session ID IE in case the Old PDU session ID IE is not included, and:

NOTE1: If the Old PDU session ID IE is not included in the UL NAS TRANSPORT message and the AMF has received a reallocation requested indication from the SMF, the AMF needs to ignore the reallocation requested indication.

i) if the AMF has a PDU session routing context for the PDU session ID and the UE, and the Request type IE is either not included or is included but set to other value than "initial request", "existing PDU session", "initial emergency request", "existing emergency PDU session" or "MA PDU request", the AMF shall send the 5GSM message, and the PDU session ID IE towards the SMF identified by the SMF ID of the PDU session routing context;

ii) if the AMF has a PDU session routing context for the PDU session ID and the UE, the PDU session routing context indicates that the PDU session is not an emergency PDU session, the Request type IE is included and is set to "existing PDU session" or "MA PDU request", and the S-NSSAI associated with the PDU session identified by the PDU session ID is allowed for the target access type, the AMF shall send the 5GSM message, the PDU session ID, the S-NSSAI, the mapped S-NSSAI (if available in roaming scenarios), the DNN (if received) and the request type towards the SMF identified by the SMF ID of the PDU session routing context;

iii) if the AMF does not have a PDU session routing context for the PDU session ID and the UE, and the Request type IE is included and is set to "initial request" or "MA PDU request":

A) the AMF shall select an SMF with following handlings in case the UE is not registered for onboarding services in SNPN:

 If the S-NSSAI IE is not included and the allowed NSSAI contains:

- one S-NSSAI, the AMF shall use the S-NSSAI in the allowed NSSAI as the S-NSSAI;

- two or more S-NSSAIs and the user's subscription context obtained from UDM contains only one default S-NSSAI that is included in the allowed NSSAI, the AMF shall use the S-NSSAI in the allowed NSSAI that matches the default S-NSSAI as the S-NSSAI; or

- two or more S-NSSAIs and the user's subscription context obtained from UDM contains zero, two or more default S-NSSAI(s) included in the allowed NSSAI, the AMF shall use an S-NSSAI in the allowed NSSAI selected based on operator policy as the S-NSSAI.

 If the DNN IE is included, the AMF shall use the UE requested DNN as the DNN determined by the AMF; and

 If the DNN IE is not included, and the user's subscription context obtained from UDM:

- contains the default DNN for the S-NSSAI, the AMF shall use the default DNN as the DNN determined by the AMF; and

- does not contain the default DNN for the S-NSSAI, the AMF shall use a locally configured DNN as the DNN determined by the AMF;

A1) the AMF shall select an SMF with following handlings in case the UE is registered for onboarding services in SNPN:

- if the AMF onboarding configuration data does not contain a configured SMF used for onboarding services in SNPN and contains the S-NSSAI used for onboarding services in SNPN, the AMF shall use the S-NSSAI used for onboarding services in SNPN as the S-NSSAI;

- if the AMF onboarding configuration data does not contain a configured SMF used for onboarding services in SNPN and contains the DNN used for onboarding services in SNPN, the AMF shall use the DNN used for onboarding services in SNPN as the DNN;

- if the AMF onboarding configuration data does not contain the S-NSSAI used for onboarding services in SNPN, does not contain the DNN used for onboarding services in SNPN, and contains a configured SMF used for onboarding services in SNPN, the AMF shall select the configured SMF used for onboarding services in SNPN;

- if the AMF onboarding configuration data contains the S-NSSAI used for onboarding services in SNPN, the DNN used for onboarding services in SNPN, or both, and contains a configured SMF used for onboarding services in SNPN, the AMF shall use the S-NSSAI used for onboarding services in SNPN, if any, as the S-NSSAI, and use the DNN used for onboarding services in SNPN, if any, as the DNN or shall select the configured SMF used for onboarding services in SNPN, according to local policy; and

- if the AMF onboarding configuration data contains none of the S-NSSAI used for onboarding services in SNPN, the DNN used for onboarding services in SNPN and a configured SMF used for onboarding services in SNPN, the AMF handling is implementation specific; and

NOTE2: The AMF can e.g. use a locally configured DNN used for onboarding services in SNPN as the DNN determined by the AMF.

NOTE3: SMF selection is outside the scope of the present document.

NOTE4: As part of SMF selection, the PCF can provide the AMF with a DNN selected by the network different from the DNN determined by the AMF.

B) if the SMF selection is successful:

- if the DNN selected by the network is a LADN DNN, the AMF shall determine the UE presence in LADN service area;

- the AMF shall store a PDU session routing context for the PDU session ID and the UE, shall set the SMF ID in the stored PDU session routing context to the SMF ID corresponding to the DNN in the user's subscription context obtained from the UDM; and

- the AMF shall send the 5GSM message, the PDU session ID, the S-NSSAI, the mapped S-NSSAI (if available in roaming scenarios), the DNN determined by the AMF, DNN selected by the network (if different from DNN determined by the AMF), the request type, the MA PDU session information, UE presence in LADN service area (if DNN received corresponds to an LADN DNN, and the onboarding indication (if the UE is registered for onboarding services in SNPN) towards the SMF identified by the SMF ID of the PDU session routing context;

NOTE5: The MA PDU session information is not sent towards the SMF if the DNN received corresponds to an LADN DNN.

iv) if the AMF does not have a PDU session routing context for the PDU session ID and the UE, the Request type IE is included and is set to "existing PDU session" or "MA PDU request", and the AMF retrieves an SMF ID associated with:

A) the PDU session ID matching the PDU session ID received from the UE, if any; or

B) the DNN matching the DNN received from the UE, otherwise;

 such that the SMF ID includes a PLMN identity corresponding to the UE's HPLMN or the current PLMN, then:

A) the AMF shall store a PDU session routing context for the PDU session ID and the UE, shall set the SMF ID in the stored PDU session routing context to the retrieved SMF ID; and

B) the AMF shall send the 5GSM message, the PDU session ID, the S-NSSAI, the mapped S-NSSAI (if available in roaming scenarios), the DNN (if received) and the request type towards the SMF identified by the SMF ID of the PDU session routing context;

v) if the AMF does not have a PDU session routing context for the PDU session ID and the UE, the Request type IE is included and is set to "initial emergency request", and the AMF does not have a PDU session routing context for another PDU session ID of the UE indicating that the PDU session is an emergency PDU session:

A) the AMF shall select an SMF. The AMF shall use the emergency DNN from the AMF emergency configuration data as the DNN, if configured. The AMF shall derive the SMF from the emergency DNN or use the statically configured SMF from the AMF emergency configuration data, if configured; and

B) if the SMF selection is successful:

- the AMF shall store a PDU session routing context for the PDU session ID and the UE, shall set the SMF ID in the stored PDU session routing context to the SMF ID of the selected SMF, and shall store an indication that the PDU session is an emergency PDU session in the stored PDU session routing context; and

- the AMF shall send the 5GSM message, the PDU session ID, the S-NSSAI (if configured in the AMF emergency configuration data), the DNN (if configured in the AMF emergency configuration data), and the request type towards the SMF identified by the SMF ID of the PDU session routing context; and

vi) if the AMF does not have a PDU session routing context for the PDU session ID and the UE, the Request type IE is included and is set to "initial emergency request", and the AMF has a PDU session routing context indicating that the PDU session is an emergency PDU session for another PDU session ID of the UE:

A) the AMF shall store a PDU session routing context for the PDU session ID and the UE and shall set the SMF ID in the stored PDU session routing context to the SMF ID of the PDU session routing context for the other PDU session ID of the UE; and

B) the AMF shall send the 5GSM message, the PDU session ID, the S-NSSAI (if configured in the AMF emergency configuration data), the DNN (if configured in the AMF emergency configuration data) and the request type towards the SMF identified by the SMF ID of the PDU session routing context; or

vii) if the AMF has a PDU session routing context for the PDU session ID and the UE, the PDU session routing context indicates that the PDU session is an emergency PDU session, and the Request type IE is included and is set to "existing emergency PDU session", the AMF shall send the 5GSM message, the PDU session ID, the S-NSSAI (if configured in the AMF emergency configuration data), the DNN (if configured in the AMF emergency configuration data), and the request type towards the SMF identified by the SMF ID of the PDU session routing context; and

viii) if the AMF does not have a PDU session routing context for the PDU session ID and the UE, the Request type IE is included and is set to "existing emergency PDU session", and the AMF retrieves an SMF ID associated with emergency services such that the SMF ID includes a PLMN identity corresponding to the current PLMN, then:

A) the AMF shall store a PDU session routing context for the PDU session ID and the UE, shall set the SMF ID in the stored PDU session routing context to the retrieved SMF ID; and

B) the AMF shall send the 5GSM message, the PDU session ID, the S-NSSAI (if configured in the AMF emergency configuration data), the DNN (if configured in the AMF emergency configuration data), and the request type towards the SMF identified by the SMF ID of the PDU session routing context; or

2) the UE and the Old PDU session ID IE in case the Old PDU session ID IE is included, and:

i) the AMF has a PDU session routing context for the old PDU session ID and the UE and does not have a PDU session routing context for the PDU session ID and the UE, the Request type IE is included and is set to "initial request", and the AMF received a reallocation requested indication from the SMF indicating that the SMF is to be reused, the AMF shall store a PDU session routing context for the PDU session ID and the UE, set the SMF ID in the stored PDU session routing context to the SMF ID of the PDU session routing context for the old PDU session ID and the UE. If the DNN is a LADN DNN, the AMF shall determine the UE presence in LADN service area. The AMF shall send the 5GSM message, the PDU session ID, the old PDU session ID, the S-NSSAI (if received), the mapped S-NSSAI (if available in roaming scenarios), the DNN, the request type and UE presence in LADN service area (if DNN received corresponds to an LADN DNN) towards the SMF identified by the SMF ID of the PDU session routing context;

ii) the AMF has a PDU session routing context for the old PDU session ID and the UE and does not have a PDU session routing context for the PDU session ID and the UE, the Request type IE is included and is set to "initial request", and the AMF received a reallocation requested indication from the SMF indicating that the SMF is to be reallocated:

A) the AMF shall select an SMF with the following handling;

 If the S-NSSAI IE is not included and the allowed NSSAI contains:

- one S-NSSAI, the AMF shall use the S-NSSAI in the allowed NSSAI as the S-NSSAI;

- two or more S-NSSAIs and the user's subscription context obtained from UDM contains only one default S-NSSAI that is included in the allowed NSSAI, the AMF shall use the S-NSSAI in the allowed NSSAI that matches the default S-NSSAI; or

- two or more S-NSSAIs and the user's subscription context obtained from UDM contains zero, two or more default S-NSSAI(s) included in the allowed NSSAI, the AMF shall use an S-NSSAI in the allowed NSSAI selected based on operator policy as the S-NSSAI.

 If the DNN is a LADN DNN, the AMF shall determine the UE presence in LADN service area.

B) if the SMF selection is successful:

- the AMF shall store a PDU session routing context for the PDU session ID and the UE and set the SMF ID of the PDU session routing context to the SMF ID of the selected SMF; and

- the AMF shall send the 5GSM message, the PDU session ID, the old PDU session ID, the S-NSSAI, the mapped S-NSSAI (if available in roaming scenarios), the DNN, the request type, the MA PDU session information and UE presence in LADN service area (if DNN received corresponds to an LADN DNN) towards the SMF identified by the SMF ID of the PDU session routing context for the PDU session ID and the UE;

NOTE6: The MA PDU session information is not sent towards the SMF if the DNN received corresponds to an LADN DNN.

b) "SMS", the AMF shall send the content of the Payload container IE to the SMSF associated with the UE;

c) "LTE Positioning Protocol (LPP) message container", the AMF shall send the Payload container type and the content of the Payload container IE to the LMF associated with the routing information included in the Additional information IE of the UL NAS TRANSPORT message;

d) "SOR transparent container", the AMF shall send the content of the Payload container IE to the UDM (see3GPPTS29.503[20AB]);

e) "UE policy container", the AMF shall send the content of the Payload container IE to the PCF.

f) "UE parameters update transparent container", the AMF shall send the content of the Payload container IE to the UDM.

g) "Location services message container":

1) if the Additional information IE is not included in the UL NAS TRANSPORT message, the AMF shall provide the Payload container type and the content of the Payload container IE to the location services application; and

2) if the Additional information IE is included in the UL NAS TRANSPORT message, the AMF shall send the Payload container type and the content of the Payload container IE to an LMF associated with routing information included in the Additional information IE of the UL NAS TRANSPORT message.

h) "CIoT user data container", the AMF shall look up a PDU session routing context for the UE and the PDU session ID, and

1) send the content of the Payload container IE towards the SMF identified by the SMF ID of the PDU session routing context; and

2) initiate the release of the N1 NAS signalling connection:

i) if the Release assistance indication IE is included in the UL NAS TRANSPORT message and the DDX field of the Release assistance indication IE indicates "No further uplink and no further downlink data transmission subsequent to the uplink data transmission is expected" and if there is no downlink signalling or downlink data for the UE; or

ii) upon subsequent delivery of the next received downlink data transmission to the UE if the Release assistance indication IE is included in the UL NAS TRANSPORT message and the DDX field of the Release assistance indication IE indicates "Only a single downlink data transmission and no further uplink data transmission subsequent to the uplink data transmission is expected" and if there is no additional downlink signalling or downlink data for the UE.

i) "Service-level-AA container" and the Service-level-AA container is included in the Payload container IE of the UL NAS TRANSPORT message, and the Service-level device ID included in the Service-level-AA container is set to a CAA-level UAV ID, the AMF shall send the content of the Payload container IE to the UAS-NF corresponding to the CAA-level UAV ID. If the Service-level device ID is not included in the Service-level-AA container and a CAA-level UAV ID is included in the 5GMM context of the UE, then the AMF shall send the content of the Payload container IE to the UAS-NF corresponding to the CAA-level UAV ID included in the 5GMM context of the UE.

j) "Multiple payloads", the AMF shall first decode the content of the Payload container IE (see subclause9.11.3.39) to obtain the number of payload container entries and for each payload container entry, the AMF shall:

i) decode the payload container type field;

ii) decode the optional IE fields and the payload container contents field in the payload container entry; and

iii) handle the content of each payload container entry the same as the content of the Payload container IE and the associated optional IEs as specified in bullets a) to i) above according to the payload container type field.

5.4.5.2.4 UE-initiated NAS transport of messages not accepted by the network

Upon reception of an UL NAS TRANSPORT message, if the Payload container type IE is set to "N1 SM information" and the UE is not configured for high priority access in selected PLMN, and:

a) if the Request type IE is set to "initial request", "existing PDU session" or "MA PDU request";

1) DNN based congestion control is activated for the DNN included in the UL NAS TRANSPORT message, or DNN based congestion control is activated for the selected DNN in case of no DNN included in the UL NAS TRANSPORT message, e.g. configured by operation and maintenance, the AMF shall send back to the UE the 5GSM message which was not forwarded, a back-off timer value and 5GMM cause #22 "congestion" as specified in subclause5.4.5.3.1 case f);

2) S-NSSAI and DNN based congestion control is activated for the S-NSSAI and DNN included in the UL NAS TRANSPORT message, or S-NSSAI and DNN based congestion control is activated for the S-NSSAI included in the UL NAS TRANSPORT message and the selected DNN in case of no DNN included in the UL NAS TRANSPORT message, or S-NSSAI and DNN based congestion control is activated for the selected S-NSSAI in case of no S-NSSAI included in the UL NAS TRANSPORT message and the DNN included in the UL NAS TRANSPORT message, or S-NSSAI and DNN based congestion control is activated for the selected S-NSSAI and the selected DNN in case of no S-NSSAI and no DNN included in the UL NAS TRANSPORT message, e.g. configured by operation and maintenance, the AMF shall send back to the UE the 5GSM message which was not forwarded, a back-off timer value and 5GMM cause #67 "insufficient resources for specific slice and DNN" as specified in subclause5.4.5.3.1 case f);

3) S-NSSAI only based congestion control is activated for the S-NSSAI included in the UL NAS TRANSPORT message, or S-NSSAI based congestion control is activated for the selected S-NSSAI in case of no S-NSSAI included in the UL NAS TRANSPORT message, e.g. configured by operation and maintenance, the AMF shall send back to the UE the 5GSM message which was not forwarded, a back-off timer value and 5GMM cause #69 "insufficient resources for specific slice" as specified in subclause5.4.5.3.1 case f);

b) void;

c) if the Request type IE is set to "modification request" and the PDU session is not an emergency PDU session;

1) DNN based congestion control is activated for the stored DNN, e.g. configured by operation and maintenance, the AMF shall send back to the UE the 5GSM message which was not forwarded, a back-off timer value and 5GMM cause #22 "congestion" as specified in subclause5.4.5.3.1 case f);

2) S-NSSAI and DNN based congestion control is activated for the stored S-NSSAI and DNN, e.g. configured by operation and maintenance, the AMF shall send back to the UE the 5GSM message which was not forwarded, a back-off timer value and 5GMM cause #67 "insufficient resources for specific slice and DNN" as specified in subclause5.4.5.3.1 case f);

3) S-NSSAI only based congestion control is activated for the stored S-NSSAI, e.g. configured by operation and maintenance, the AMF shall send back to the UE the 5GSM message which was not forwarded, a back-off timer value and 5GMM cause #69 "insufficient resources for specific slice" as specified in subclause5.4.5.3.1 case f); or

d) the timer T3447 is running and the UE does not support service gap control:

1) the Request type IE:

i) is set to "initial request";

ii) is set to "existing PDU session"; or

iii) is set to "modification request" and the PDU session being modified is a non-emergency PDU session;

2) the current NAS signalling connection was not triggered by paging; and

3) mobile terminated signalling has not been sent or no user-plane resources have been established for any PDU session after the establishment of the current NAS signalling connection,

 the AMF shall send back to the UE the message which was not forwarded, send the 5GMM cause #22 "Congestion", and may include a back-off timer set to the remaining time of the timer T3447 as specified in subclause5.4.5.3.1 case f).

Upon reception of a UL NAS TRANSPORT message, if the Payload container type IE is set to "N1 SM information", the Request type IE is set to "initial request", "existing PDU session" or "MA PDU request", and the AMF determines that the PLMN's maximum number of PDU sessions has already been reached for the UE, the AMF shall send back to the UE the 5GSM message which was not forwarded and 5GMM cause #65 "maximum number of PDU sessions reached" as specified in subclause5.4.5.3.1 caseh).

Upon reception of a UL NAS TRANSPORT message, if the Payload container type IE is set to "N1 SM information", the Request type IE is set to "initial request", and

a) the UE is in NB-N1 mode;

b) the UE has indicated preference for user plane CIoT 5GS optimization;

c) the network accepted the use of user plane CIoT 5GS optimization; and

d) the AMF determines that there are user-plane resources established for a number of PDU sessions that is equal to the UE' s maximum number of supported user-plane resources (see 3GPPTS23.501[8]),

the AMF shall either:

a) send back to the UE the message which was not forwarded as specified in in subclause5.4.5.3.1 caseh1); or

b) proceed with the PDU session establishment and include the Control Plane CIoT 5GS Optimisation indication or Control Plane Only indicator to the SMF.

Upon reception of an UL NAS TRANSPORT message, if the Payload container type IE is set to "CIoT user data container", the UE is not configured for high priority access in selected PLMN, and:

a) the timer T3447 is running and the UE does not support service gap control;

b) the current NAS signalling connection was not triggered by paging; and

c) mobile terminated signalling has not been sent or no user-plane resources have been established for any PDU session after the establishment of the current NAS signalling connection;

the AMF shall send back to the UE the CIoT user data which was not forwarded, send the 5GMM cause #22 "Congestion", and include a back-off timer set to the remaining time of the timer T3447 as specified in subclause5.4.5.3.1 case l2).

Upon reception of a UL NAS TRANSPORT message, if the Payload container type IE is set to "N1 SM information", the Request type IE is set to "existing PDU session", and

a) the UE is in NB-N1 mode;

b) the UE has indicated preference for user plane CIoT 5GS optimization;

c) the network accepted the use of user plane CIoT 5GS optimization; and

d) the AMF determines that there are user-plane resources established for a number of PDU sessions that equals to the UE's maximum number of supported user-plane resources (see 3GPPTS23.501[8]),

the AMF shall send back to the UE the message which was not forwarded as specified in in subclause5.4.5.3.1 caseh1).

Upon reception of an UL NAS TRANSPORT message, if the Payload container type IE is set to "N1 SM information", the Request type IE is set to "initial request" or "modification request", the associated S-NSSAI that the AMF determined through the S-NSSAI IE or the PDU session ID IE is an S-NSSAI for which the AMF is performing NSSAA, and the AMF determines to not forward the 5GSM message to the SMF based on local policy, the AMF shall send back to the UE the 5GSM message which was not forwarded as specified in subclause5.4.5.3.1 caseh2).

Upon reception of an UL NAS TRANSPORT message, if the Payload container type IE is set to "SMS" or "LTE Positioning Protocol (LPP) message container", the UE is not configured for high priority access in selected PLMN, and:

a) the timer T3447 is running and the UE does not support service gap control;

b) the current NAS signalling connection was not triggered by paging; and

c) mobile terminated signalling has not been sent or no user-plane resources have been established for any PDU session after the establishment of the current NAS signalling connection;

the AMF shall abort the procedure.

NOTE1: In this state the NAS signalling connection can be released by the network.

Upon reception of an UL NAS TRANSPORT message, if the Payload container type IE is set to "N1 SM information", the Request type IE is set to "initial request", and:

a) the determined DNN, S-NSSAI or both DNN and S-NSSAI are identified for UAS services; and

b) the UE is marked in the UE's 5GMM context that it is not allowed to request UAS services;

the AMF shall send back to the UE the 5GSM message which was not forwarded as specified in subclause5.4.5.3.1 caseh4).

NOTE2: The UE marked in the UE's 5GMM context as not allowed to request UAS services happens in the case that the UUAA-MM procedure needs to be performed during the registration procedure according to operator policy.

5.4.5.2.5 Abnormal cases on the network side

The following abnormal cases in AMF are identified:

a) If the Payload container type IE is set to "N1 SM information" and:

1) if the Old PDU session ID IE is not included in the UL NAS TRANSPORT message, the AMF does not have a PDU session routing context for the PDU session ID and the UE, the Request type IE is set to "initial request" or "MA PDU request", and the SMF selection fails, then the AMF shall send back to the UE the 5GSM message which was not forwarded as specified in subclause5.4.5.3.1 case e) or case f);

2) if the Old PDU session ID IE is included in the UL NAS TRANSPORT message, the AMF has a PDU session routing context for the old PDU session ID and the UE and does not have a PDU session routing context for the PDU session ID and the UE, the Request type IE is set to "initial request", the AMF received a reallocation requested indication from the SMF indicating that the SMF is to be reallocated, and the SMF selection fails, then the AMF shall send back to the UE the 5GSM message which was not forwarded as specified in subclause5.4.5.3.1 case e) or case f);

3) if the AMF does not have a PDU session routing context for the PDU session ID and the UE, the Request type IE is set to "existing PDU session" or "MA PDU request", and the user's subscription context obtained from the UDM does not contain an SMF ID for the PDU session ID matching the PDU session ID received from the UE or for the DNN matching the DNN received from the UE such that the SMF ID includes a PLMN identity corresponding to the UE's HPLMN or the current PLMN or the PLMN ID part of the current SNPN, then the AMF may send back to the UE the 5GSM message which was not forwarded as specified in subclause5.4.5.3.1 case e) or case f).

4) if the Old PDU session ID IE is included in the UL NAS TRANSPORT message, and the AMF has a PDU session routing context for the old PDU session ID and the UE and does not have a PDU session routing context for the PDU session ID and the UE, the Request type IE is set to "initial request" and the AMF has not received a reallocation requested indication, the AMF should select an SMF with following handlings:

i) if the S-NSSAI IE is not included and the allowed NSSAI contains:

A) one S-NSSAI, the AMF shall use the S-NSSAI in the allowed NSSAI as the S-NSSAI;

B) two or more S-NSSAIs and the user's subscription context obtained from UDM contains only one default S-NSSAI that is included in the allowed NSSAI, the AMF shall use the S-NSSAI in the allowed NSSAI as the S-NSSAI; or

C) two or more S-NSSAIs and the user's subscription context obtained from UDM contains zero, two or more default S-NSSAI(s) included in the allowed NSSAI, the AMF shall use an S-NSSAI in the allowed NSSAI selected based on operator policy as the S-NSSAI;

ii) if the DNN IE is not included, and the user's subscription context obtained from UDM:

A) contains the default DNN for the S-NSSAI, the AMF shall use the default DNN as the DNN; and

B) does not contain the default DNN for the S-NSSAI, the AMF shall use a locally configured DNN as the DNN;

iii) if the DNN selected by the network is a LADN DNN, the AMF shall determine the UE presence in LADN service area;

iv) if the SMF selection is successful, the AMF should store a PDU session routing context for the PDU session ID and the UE, set the SMF ID in the stored PDU session routing context to the selected SMF ID, and forward the 5GSM message, the PDU session ID, the old PDU session ID, the S-NSSAI, the mapped S-NSSAI (if available in roaming scenarios), the DNN determined by the AMF, DNN selected by the network (if different from DNN determined by the AMF), the request type and UE presence in LADN service area (if DNN selected by the network corresponds to an LADN DNN) towards the SMF ID of the PDU session routing context; and

v) if the SMF selection fails, then the AMF shall send back to the UE the 5GSM message which was not forwarded as specified in subclause5.4.5.3.1 case e) or case f);

5) if the AMF has a PDU session routing context for the PDU session ID and the UE, the PDU session routing context indicates that the PDU session is an emergency PDU session, the Request type IE is set to "initial emergency request", the AMF should forward the 5GSM message, the PDU session ID, the S-NSSAI (if configured in the AMF emergency configuration data), the DNN (if configured in the AMF emergency configuration data) and the request type towards the SMF ID of the PDU session routing context;

6) if the Request type IE is set to "initial emergency request" and the S-NSSAI or the DNN is received, the AMF ignores the received S-NSSAI or the DNN and uses the emergency DNN from the AMF emergency configuration data, if any;

7) if the AMF does not have a PDU session routing context for the PDU session ID and the UE, and the Request type IE of the UL NAS TRANSPORT message is either not provided or is provided but set to other value than "initial request", "existing PDU session", "initial emergency request", "existing emergency PDU session" and "MA PDU request", then the AMF may send back to the UE the 5GSM message which was not forwarded as specified in subclause5.4.5.3.1 case e) or case f);

8) if the AMF unsuccessfully attempted to forward the 5GSM message, the PDU session ID, the S-NSSAI, the mapped S-NSSAI (if available in roaming scenarios), the DNN and the request type (if received) towards a SMF ID, then the AMF may send back to the UE the 5GSM message which was not forwarded as specified in subclause5.4.5.3.1 case e) or case f).

9) if the Old PDU session ID IE is included in the UL NAS TRANSPORT message, the AMF does not have a PDU session routing context for the old PDU session ID and the UE, the AMF does not have a PDU session routing context for the PDU session ID and the UE, the Request type IE is set to "initial request", the AMF should select an SMF with following handlings:

i) if the S-NSSAI IE is not included and the allowed NSSAI contains:

A) one S-NSSAI, the AMF shall use the S-NSSAI in the allowed NSSAI as the S-NSSAI;

B) two or more S-NSSAIs and the user's subscription context obtained from UDM contains only one default S-NSSAI that is included in the allowed NSSAI, the AMF shall use the default S-NSSAI in the allowed NSSAI as the S-NSSAI; or

C) two or more S-NSSAIs and the user's subscription context obtained from UDM contains zero, two or more default S-NSSAI(s) included in the allowed NSSAI, the AMF shall use an S-NSSAI in the allowed NSSAI selected based on operator policy as the S-NSSAI.

ii) if the DNN IE is not included, and the user's subscription context obtained from UDM:

A) contains the default DNN for the S-NSSAI, the AMF shall use the default DNN as the DNN; and

B) does not contain the default DNN for the S-NSSAI, the AMF shall use a locally configured DNN as the DNN;

iii) if the DNN selected by the network is a LADN DNN, the AMF shall determine the UE presence in LADN service area;

iv) if the SMF selection is successful, the AMF should store a PDU session routing context for the PDU session ID and the UE, set the SMF ID in the stored PDU session routing context to the selected SMF ID, and forward the 5GSM message, the PDU session ID, the old PDU session ID, the S-NSSAI, the mapped S-NSSAI (if available in roaming scenarios), the DNN determined by the AMF, DNN selected by the network (if different from DNN determined by the AMF), the request type and UE presence in LADN service area (if DNN selected by the network corresponds to an LADN DNN) towards the SMF ID of the PDU session routing context; and

v) if the SMF selection fails, then the AMF shall send back to the UE the 5GSM message which was not forwarded as specified in subclause5.4.5.3.1 case e) or case f);

10) if the AMF has a PDU session routing context for the PDU session ID and the UE, the PDU session routing context indicates that the PDU session is not an emergency PDU session, and the Request type IE is included and is set to "existing emergency PDU session", the AMF may send back to the UE the 5GSM message which was not forwarded as specified in subclause5.4.5.3.1 case e) or case f);

11) if the AMF has a PDU session routing context for the PDU session ID and the UE, the PDU session routing context indicates that the PDU session is an emergency PDU session, and the Request type IE is included and is set to "existing PDU session", the AMF may forward the 5GSM message, the PDU session ID, the S-NSSAI (if configured in the AMF emergency configuration data), the DNN (if configured in the AMF emergency configuration data), and the request type towards the SMF identified by the SMF ID of the PDU session routing context;

12) if the AMF has a PDU session routing context for the PDU session ID and the UE, the Request type IE is set to "initial request", then the AMF shall perform a local release of the PDU session identified by the PDU session ID and shall request the SMF to perform a local release of the PDU session, and proceed as specified in subclause5.4.5.2.3;

13) if the Request type IE is set to "initial request" or "modification request", and the S-NSSAI IE contains an S-NSSAI that is not allowed by the network, then the AMF shall send back to the UE the 5GSM message which was not forwarded as specified in subclause5.4.5.3.1 case e), case f) or h4);

14) if the Request type IE is set to "existing PDU session", the AMF has a PDU session routing context for the PDU session ID and the UE, the PDU session routing context indicates that the PDU session is not an emergency PDU session, and the S-NSSAI associated with the PDU session identified by the PDU session ID is not allowed for the target access type, the AMF shall send back to the UE the 5GSM message which was not forwarded as specified in subclause5.4.5.3.1 case e), case f) or h4);

15) if the Request type IE is set to "initial request", "existing PDU session", "modification request" or "MA PDU request", the UE is not configured for high priority access in selected PLMN, and the UE is in non-allowed area or is not in allowed area, the AMF shall send back to the UE the 5GSM message which was not forwarded, and 5GMM cause #28 "Restricted service area" as specified in subclause5.4.5.3.1 case i);

15a) if the Request type IE is set to "initial request" or "initial emergency request" and the AMF determines that the UE has registered to a PLMN via a satellite NG-RAN cell that is not allowed to operate at the present UE location, then the AMF may send back to the UE the 5GSM message which was not forwarded as specified in subclause5.4.5.3.1 case i1); and

16) if the Request type IE is set to "initial request" or "MA PDU request", the AMF is pending the receipt of a REGISTRATION REQUEST message indicating "mobility registration updating" in the 5GS registration type IE, and an emergency PDU session exists for the UE (see subclause5.4.4.3), the AMF shall send back to the UE the 5GSM message which was not forwarded as specified in subclause5.4.5.3.1 case e) or case f);

17) if the timer T3447 is running and the UE supports service gap control and:

i) the Request type IE:

A) is set to "initial request";

B) is set to "existing PDU session"; or

C is set to "modification request" and the PDU session being modified is a non-emergency PDU session;

ii) the UE is not configured for high priority access in selected PLMN;

iii) the current NAS signalling connection was not triggered by paging; and

iv) mobile terminated signalling has not been sent or no user-plane resources have been established for any PDU session after the establishment of the current NAS signalling connection,

 then the AMF shall send back to the UE the 5GSM message which was not forwarded as specified in subclause5.4.5.3.1 case e) or case f);

18) if the AMF has a PDU session routing context for the PDU session ID and the UE, the Request type IE is not included, the UE is not configured for high priority access in selected PLMN, and the PDU session is not an emergency PDU session, then the AMF shall forward the 5GSM message, and the PDU session ID IE towards the SMF identified by the SMF ID of the PDU session routing context with:

i) an exemptionInd attribute indicating "message was exempted from the DNN based congestion activated in the AMF" as specified in 3GPPTS29.502[20A], if DNN based congestion control is activated for the selected DNN;

ii) an exemptionInd attribute indicating "message was exempted from the S-NSSAI and DNN based congestion activated in the AMF" as specified in 3GPPTS29.502[20A], if S-NSSAI and DNN based congestion control is activated for the selected S-NSSAI and the selected DNN; or

iii) an exemptionInd attribute indicating "message was exempted from the S-NSSAI only based congestion activated in the AMF" as specified in 3GPPTS29.502[20A], if S-NSSAI only based congestion control is activated for the selected S-NSSAI;

19) if the Request type IE is set to "MA PDU request" and the S-NSSAI IE contains an S-NSSAI that is not allowed by the network on neither access, then the AMF shall send to the UE the 5GSM message which was not forwarded as specified in subclause5.4.5.3.1 case e) or case f);

20) if the Request type IE is set to "initial request" and the UE is registered for emergency services over the current access, then the AMF may send back to the UE the 5GSM message which was not forwarded as specified in subclause5.4.5.3.1 case e) or case f); and

21) if the Request type IE is set to "existing PDU session", the UE is attempting to transfer a PDU session from 3GPP access to non-3GPP access, and the PDU session is associated with control plane only indication then the AMF shall send back to the UE the 5GSM message which was not forwarded as specified in subclause5.4.5.3.1 case e).

22) if the Request type IE is set to "MA PDU request" and the UE requested DNN corresponds to an LADN DNN, the AMF shall send back to the UE the 5GSM message which was not forwarded and 5GMM cause #90 "payload was not forwarded" as specified in subclause5.4.5.3.1 casehx).

23) if the Request type IE is set to "initial request", the UE requested DNN corresponds to an LADN DNN, and the MA PDU session information IE is included, the AMF shall not forward the MA PDU session information towards the SMF.

24) if the Request type IE is set to "modification request", the DNN associated with the PDU session corresponds to an LADN DNN, and MA PDU session information IE is included, the AMF shall not forward the MA PDU session information towards the SMF.

b) If the Payload container type IE is set to "SMS" and the AMF does not have an SMSF address associated with the UE or the AMF cannot forward the content of the Payload container IE to the SMSF associated with the SMSF address available in the AMF, the AMF shall abort the procedure.

c) If the Payload container type IE is set to "LTE Positioning Protocol (LPP) message container" and if the Additional information IE is not included in the UL NAS TRANSPORT message or the AMF cannot forward the content of the Payload container IE to the LMF associated with the routing information included in the Additional information IE, the AMF shall abort the procedure.

d) If the Payload container type IE is set to "UE policy container" and the AMF does not have a PCF address associated with the UE or the AMF cannot forward the content of the Payload container IE to the PCF associated with the PCF address available in the AMF, the AMF shall abort the procedure.

e) If the Payload container type IE is set to "Location services message container" and if the Additional information IE is included in the UL NAS TRANSPORT message and the AMF cannot forward the content of the Payload container IE to an LMF associated with the routing information included in the Additional information IE, the AMF shall abort the procedure.

f) If the Payload container type IE is set to "SMS" or "LTE Positioning Protocol (LPP) message container":

1) the timer T3447 is running and the UE supports service gap control;

2) the UE is not configured for high priority access in selected PLMN;

3) the current NAS signalling connection was not triggered by paging; and

4) mobile terminated signalling has not been sent or no user-plane resources have been established for any PDU session after the establishment of the current NAS signalling connection,

 the AMF shall abort the procedure.

NOTE: In this state the N1 NAS signalling connection can be released by the network.

g) If the Payload container type IE is set to "CIoT user data container" and:

1) if the AMF does not have a PDU session routing context for the PDU session ID and the UE; or

2) if the AMF unsuccessfully attempted to forward the user data container and the PDU session ID,

 then the AMF may send back to the UE the CIoT user data container which was not forwarded as specified in subclause5.4.5.3.1 case l1).

h) If the Payload container type IE is set to "CIoT user data container":

1) if the timer T3447 is running and the UE supports service gap control;

2) the UE is not configured for high priority access in selected PLMN;

3) the current N1 NAS signalling connection was not triggered by paging; and

4) mobile terminated signalling has not been sent or no user-plane resources have been established for any PDU session after the establishment of the current NAS signalling connection,

 then the AMF shall send back to the UE the CIoT user data container which was not forwarded as specified in subclause5.4.5.3.1 case l1).

5.4.5.2.6 Abnormal cases in the UE

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a) The lower layers indicate that the access attempt is barred.

 The UE shall not start the UE-initiated NAS transport procedure. The UE stays in the current serving cell and applies the normal cell reselection process.

 If the access category for the access attempt is 6 due to a request from upper layers to send a mobile originated SMS over NAS and the UE is registered to the network via both 3GPP access and non-3GPP access, the UE may transmit the UL NAS TRANSPORT message via non-3GPP access, if available.

 Otherwise, the UE-initiated NAS transport procedure is started, if still needed, when the lower layers indicate that the barring is alleviated for the access category with which the access attempt was associated.

aa) The lower layers indicate that:

1) access barring is applicable for all access categories except categories 0 and 2 and the access category with which the access attempt was associated is other than 0 and 2; or

2) access barring is applicable for all access categories except category 0 and the access category with which the access attempt was associated is other than 0.

 The UE shall proceed as specified for case a. For additional UE requirements see subclause4.5.5.

b) If the Payload container type IE is set to "N1 SM information", the Request type IE is set to "initial request" or "MA PDU request" and registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update is pending due to receipt by the UE of new network slicing information via the generic UE configuration update procedure with re-registration request; and an emergency PDU session exists then:

1) The UE shall not send the UL NAS TRANSPORT message; and

2) The UL NAS TRANSPORT message can be sent, if still necessary, after a successful procedure for mobility and periodic registration update.

c) Transmission failure of the UL NAS TRANSPORT message with change in the current TAI.

 If the current TAI is not in the TAI list, the UE-initiated NAS transport procedure shall be aborted and a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update shall be initiated. The UL NAS TRANSPORT message can be sent, if still necessary, after a successful procedure for mobility and periodic registration update.

 If the current TAI is still part of the TAI list, it is up to the UE implementation how to re-run the ongoing procedure that triggered the UE-initiated NAS transport procedure.

d) Transmission failure of the UL NAS TRANSPORT message indication without change in the current TAI.

 It is up to the UE implementation how to re-run the ongoing procedure that triggered the UE-initiated NAS transport procedure.

e) Void.

f) Timer T3447 is running.

 The UE shall not send the UL NAS TRANSPORT message unless:

1) the Payload container type IE is set to "N1 SM information" and:

i) the Request type IE is set to:

A) "initial emergency request";

B) "existing emergency PDU session"; or

C) "modification request" and the PDU session being modified is an emergency PDU session (see error cases described in subclause6.4.1.3 and subclause6.3.2.3); or

ii) the Request type IE is not included and the PDU session modification procedure is used to indicate a change of 3GPP PS data off UE status for a PDU session;

2) the UE is a UE configured for high priority access in selected PLMN;

3) a paging request triggered the establishment of the current NAS signalling connection; or

4) the UE in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode receives mobile terminated signalling or downlink data over the user-plane.

 The UL NAS TRANSPORT message can be sent, if still necessary, when timer T3447 expires or timer T3447 is stopped.

g) The lower layers indicate that the RRC connection has been suspended.

 The UE shall abort the UE-initiated NAS transport procedure.

h) Timer T3346 is running.

 The UE shall not send the UL NAS TRANSPORT message unless:

1) the Payload container type IE is set to "N1 SM information" and:

i) the Request type IE is set to:

A) "initial emergency request";

B) "existing emergency PDU session"; or

C) "modification request" and the PDU session being modified is an emergency PDU session; or

ii) the Request type IE is not included and the PDU session modification procedure is used to indicate a change of 3GPP PS data off UE status for a PDU session; or

2) the UE is a UE configured for high priority access in selected PLMN.

 The UL NAS TRANSPORT message can be sent, if still necessary, when timer T3346 expires.

i) NAS MAC calculation indication from lower layers.

 If lower layers indicate to calculate an NAS MAC, the UE shall calculate an NAS MAC as specified in 3GPPTS33.501[24] and then provide the calculated NAS MAC and 5 least significant bits of the uplink NAS COUNT used to calculate the NAS MAC to lower layers (see 3GPPTS36.331[25A]). The UE shall increase the uplink NAS COUNT by one after the calculation of the NAS MAC.

5.4.5.3 Network-initiated NAS transport procedure

5.4.5.3.1 General

The purpose of the network-initiated NAS transport procedure is to provide a transport of:

a) a single 5GSM message;

b) SMS;

c) an LPP message;

d) an SOR transparent container;

e) a single uplink 5GSM message which was not forwarded due to routing failure;

f) a single uplink 5GSM message which was not forwarded due to congestion control;

g) a UE policy container;

h) a single uplink 5GSM message which was not forwarded, because the PLMN's maximum number of PDU sessions has been reached;

h1) a single uplink 5GSM message which was not forwarded, because the maximum number of PDU sessions with active user-plane resources has been reached;

h2) a single uplink 5GSM message which was not forwarded, because of ongoing network slice-specific authentication and authorization procedure for the S-NSSAI that is requested;

h3) a single uplink 5GSM message which was not forwarded, because the UE requested to establish an MA PDU session for LADN DNN;

h4) a single uplink 5GSM message which was not forwarded, because the maximum number of UEs for a network slice has been reached;

h5) a single uplink 5GSM message which was not forwarded because the UE is marked in the UE's 5GMM context that it is not allowed to request UAS services;

i) a single uplink 5GSM message which was not forwarded due to service area restrictions;

i1) a single uplink 5GSM message which was not forwarded because the UE is registered to a PLMN via a satellite NG-RAN cell that is not allowed to operate at the present UE location;

j) a UE parameters update transparent container;

k) a location services message;

l) a CIoT user data container;

l1) a single uplink CIoT user data container or control plane user data which was not forwarded due to routing failure;

l2) a single uplink CIoT user data container which was not forwarded due to congestion control;

m) a service-level-AA container;

m1) an event notification for upper layers; or

n) multiple of the above types.

from the AMF to the UE in a 5GMM message.

5.4.5.3.2 Network-initiated NAS transport procedure initiation

In 5GMM-CONNECTED mode, the AMF initiates the NAS transport procedure by sending the DL NAS TRANSPORT message, as shown in figure5.4.5.3.2.1.

In case a) in subclause5.4.5.3.1, i.e. upon reception from an SMF of a 5GSM message without an N1 SM delivery skip allowed indication for a UE or a 5GSM message with an N1 SM delivery skip allowed indication for a UE in the 5GMM-CONNECTED mode, the AMF shall:

a) include the PDU session information (PDU session ID) in the PDU session ID IE;

b) set the Payload container type IE to "N1 SM information"; and

c) set the Payload container IE to the 5GSM message.

In case b) in subclause5.4.5.3.1, i.e. upon reception from an SMSF of an SMS payload, the AMF shall:

a) set the Payload container type IE to "SMS";

b) set the Payload container IE to the SMS payload; and

c) select the access type to deliver the DL NAS TRANSPORT message as follows in case the access type selection is required:

1) if the UE to receive the DL NAS TRANSPORT message is registered to the network via both 3GPP access and non-3GPP access, the 5GMM context of the UE indicates that SMS over NAS is allowed, the UE is in MICO mode, and the UE is in 5GMM-IDLE mode for 3GPP access and in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode for non-3GPP access, then the AMF selects non-3GPP access. Otherwise, the AMF selects either 3GPP access or non-3GPP access.

 If the delivery of the DL NAS TRANSPORT message over 3GPP access has failed, the AMF may re-send the DL NAS TRANSPORT message over the non-3GPP access.

 If the delivery of the DL NAS TRANSPORT message over non-3GPP access has failed, the AMF may re-send the DL NAS TRANSPORT message over the 3GPP access; and

2) otherwise, the AMF selects 3GPP access.

NOTE1: The AMF selects an access type between 3GPP access and non-3GPP access based on operator policy.

In case c) in subclause5.4.5.3.1 i.e. upon reception from an LMF of an LPP message payload, the AMF shall:

a) set the Payload container type IE to "LTE Positioning Protocol (LPP) message container";

b) set the Payload container IE to the LPP message payload received from the LMF;

c) set the Additional information IE to an LCS correlation identifier received from the LMF from which the LPP message was received.

NOTE2: The LCS Correlation Identifier is assigned originally by the AMF except for LPP message transfer associated with event reporting for periodic or triggered location as described in subclause6.3.1 of 3GPPTS23.273[6B], where the LMF assigns the correlation identifier. AMF and LMF assigned correlation identifiers can be distinguished by an implementation specific convention (e.g. use of a different number of octets) to enable an AMF to distinguish one from the other when received in the Additional Information IE in an UL NAS Transport message.

In case d) in subclause5.4.5.3.1 i.e. upon reception of a steering of roaming information (see 3GPPTS23.122[5]) from the UDM to be forwarded to the UE, the AMF shall:

a) set the Payload container type IE to "SOR transparent container"; and

b) set the Payload container IE to the steering of roaming information received from the UDM (see3GPPTS29.503[20AB]).

In case e) in subclause5.4.5.3.1, i.e. upon sending a single uplink 5GSM message which was not forwarded due to routing failure, the AMF shall:

a) include the PDU session ID in the PDU session ID IE;

b) set the Payload container type IE to "N1 SM information";

c) set the Payload container IE to the 5GSM message which was not forwarded;

d) set the 5GMM cause IE to the 5GMM cause #90 "payload was not forwarded" or 5GMM cause #91 "DNN not supported or not subscribed in the slice".

 The AMF sets the 5GMM cause IE to the 5GMM cause #91 "DNN not supported or not subscribed in the slice", if the 5GSM message could not be forwarded since SMF selection fails because:

1) the DNN is not supported in the slice identified by the S-NSSAI used by the AMF; or

2) neither the DNN provided by the UE nor the wildcard DNN are in the subscribed DNN list of the UE for the S-NSSAI used by the AMF.

 Otherwise, the AMF sets the 5GMM cause IE to the 5GMM cause #90 "payload was not forwarded"; and

e) optionally include the Back-off timer value IE if the 5GMM cause IE is set to 5GMM cause #91 "DNN not supported or not subscribed in the slice" due to the DNN is not supported in the slice.

In case f) in subclause5.4.5.3.1, i.e. upon sending a single uplink 5GSM message which was not forwarded due to congestion control, the AMF shall:

a) include the PDU session ID in the PDU session ID IE;

b) set the Payload container type IE to "N1 SM information";

c) set the Payload container IE to the 5GSM message which was not forwarded;

d) set the 5GMM cause IE to the 5GMM cause #22 "Congestion", the 5GMM cause #67 "insufficient resources for specific slice and DNN" or the 5GMM cause #69 "insufficient resources for specific slice"; and

e) include the Back-off timer value IE.

In case g) in subclause5.4.5.3.1, i.e. upon reception of a UE policy container from the PCF to be forwarded to the UE, the AMF shall:

a) set the Payload container type IE to "UE policy container"; and

b) set the Payload container IE to the UE policy container received from the PCF.

In caseh) in subclause5.4.5.3.1, i.e. upon sending a single uplink 5GSM message which was not forwarded, because the PLMN's maximum number of PDU sessions has been reached, the AMF shall:

a) include the PDU session ID in the PDU session ID IE;

b) set the Payload container type IE to "N1 SM information";

c) set the Payload container IE to the 5GSM message which was not forwarded; and

d) set the 5GMM cause IE to the 5GMM cause #65 "maximum number of PDU sessions reached".

In caseh1) in subclause5.4.5.3.1, i.e. upon sending a single uplink 5GSM message which was not forwarded, because the maximum number of PDU sessions with active user-plane resources has been reached, the AMF shall:

a) include the PDU session ID in the PDU session ID IE;

b) set the Payload container type IE to "N1 SM information";

c) set the Payload container IE to the 5GSM message which was not forwarded; and

d) set the 5GMM cause IE to the 5GMM cause #92 "insufficient user-plane resources for the PDU session".

In caseh2) in subclause5.4.5.3.1, i.e. upon sending a single uplink 5GSM message which was not forwarded because the UE requested to establish a PDU session associated with an S-NSSAI or to modify a PDU session associated with an S-NSSAI for which:

a) the AMF is performing network slice-specific authentication and authorization and determined to reject the request based on local policy; or

b) the network slice-specific authentication and authorization has failed or the authorization has been revoked;

the AMF shall:

a) include the PDU session ID in the PDU session ID IE;

b) set the Payload container type IE to "N1 SM information";

c) set the Payload container IE to the 5GSM message which was not forwarded; and

d) set the 5GMM cause IE to the 5GMM cause #90 "payload was not forwarded".

In caseh3) in subclause5.4.5.3.1, i.e. upon sending a single uplink 5GSM message which was not forwarded because the UE requested to establish an MA PDU session for LADN DNN, the AMF shall:

a) include the PDU session ID in the PDU session ID IE;

b) set the Payload container type IE to "N1 SM information";

c) set the Payload container IE to the 5GSM message which was not forwarded; and

d) set the 5GMM cause IE to the 5GMM cause #90 "payload was not forwarded".

In caseh4) in subclause5.4.5.3.1, i.e. upon sending a single uplink 5GSM message which was not forwarded, because the maximum number of UEs for a network slice has been reached, the AMF shall:

a) include the PDU session ID in the PDU session ID IE;

b) set the Payload container type IE to "N1 SM information";

c) set the Payload container IE to the 5GSM message which was not forwarded;

d) set the 5GMM cause IE to the 5GMM cause #69 "insufficient resources for specific slice"; and

e) include the Back-off timer value IE.

For caseh5) in subclause5.4.5.3.1, i.e. upon sending a single uplink 5GSM message which was not forwarded because the UE is marked in the UE's 5GMM context that it is not allowed to request UAS services, the AMF shall:

a) include the PDU session ID in the PDU session ID IE;

b) set the Payload container type IE to "N1 SM information";

c) set the Payload container IE to the 5GSM message which was not forwarded; and

d) set the 5GMM cause IE to the 5GMM cause #79 "UAS services not allowed".

In case i) in subclause5.4.5.3.1, i.e. upon sending a single uplink 5GSM message which was not forwarded due to service area restrictions, the AMF shall:

a) include the PDU session ID in the PDU session ID IE;

b) set the Payload container type IE to "N1 SM information";

c) set the Payload container IE to the 5GSM message which was not forwarded; and

d) set the 5GMM cause IE to the 5GMM cause #28 "Restricted service area".

In case i1) in subclause5.4.5.3.1, i.e. upon sending a single uplink 5GSM message which was not forwarded because the UE is registered to a PLMN via a satellite NG-RAN cell that is not allowed to operate at the present UE location, the AMF shall:

a) include the PDU session ID in the PDU session ID IE;

b) set the Payload container type IE to "N1 SM information";

c) set the Payload container IE to the 5GSM message which was not forwarded; and

d) set the 5GMM cause IE to the 5GMM cause #78 "PLMN not allowed to operate at the present UE location".

In case j) in subclause5.4.5.3.1 i.e. upon reception of UE parameters update data (see 3GPPTS23.502[9]) from the UDM to be forwarded to the UE, the AMF shall:

a) set the Payload container type IE to "UE parameters update transparent container"; and

b) set the contents of the Payload container IE to the UE parameters update data (see 3GPPTS23.502[9]) received from the UDM.

For case k) in subclause5.4.5.3.1 upon reception from a location services application of a Location services message payload, the AMF shall:

a) set the Payload container type IE to "Location services message container"; and

b) set the Payload container IE to the Location services message payload.

For case k) in subclause5.4.5.3.1 upon reception from an LMF of a Location services message payload, the AMF shall:

a) set the Payload container type IE to "Location services message container";

b) set the Payload container IE to the Location services message payload; and

c) set the Additional information IE to routing information associated with the LMF from which the Location services message payload was received.

NOTE3: Case k) in subclause5.4.5.3.1 supports transport of a Location services message container between a UE and an AMF and between a UE and an LMF. For transport between a UE and an LMF, the Additional information IE is included and provides routing information for the LMF. For transport between a UE and an AMF, the Additional information IE is not included.

In case l) in subclause5.4.5.3.1, i.e. upon reception from an SMF of a user data container payload, the AMF shall:

a) include the PDU session ID in the PDU session ID IE;

b) set the Payload container type IE to "CIoT user data container"; and

c) set the Payload container IE to the user data container.

For case l1) in subclause5.4.5.3.1, i.e. upon sending a single uplink CIoT user data container or control plane user data which was not forwarded due to routing failure, the AMF shall:

a) include the PDU session ID in the PDU session ID IE;

b) set the Payload container type IE to " CIoT user data container";

c) set the Payload container IE to the CIoT user data container or control plane user data which was not forwarded; and

d) set the 5GMM cause IE to the 5GMM cause #90 "payload was not forwarded".

NOTE4: For case l1) in subclause5.4.5.3.1, this is also applied for a single uplink CIoT user data container or control plane user data in the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message which was not forwarded due to routing failure.

For case l2) in subclause5.4.5.3.1, i.e. upon sending a single uplink CIoT user data container which was not forwarded due to congestion control, the AMF shall:

a) include the PDU session ID in the PDU session ID IE;

b) set the Payload container type IE to " CIoT user data container";

c) set the Payload container IE to the CIoT user data container which was not forwarded;

d) set the 5GMM cause IE to the 5GMM cause #22 "Congestion", the 5GMM cause #67 "insufficient resources for specific slice and DNN" or the 5GMM cause #69 "insufficient resources for specific slice", and include the Back-off timer value IE.

In case m) in subclause5.4.5.3.1, during UUAA-MM procedure, if the AMF receives the UUAA payload from the UAS-NF, the AMF shall include the Service-level-AA container IE containing the service-level-AA payload type with the value set to "UUAA payload" and the service-level-AA payload with the value set to the UUAA payload.

In case m1) in subclause5.4.5.3.1, i.e. if the AMF needs to send an event notification indicator for upper layers to the UE which set the "EventNotification" bit of the 5GMM capability IE in the last REGISTRATION REQUEST message  to "Event notification supported", the AMF shall:

a) set the Payload container type IE to "Event notification"; and

b) set the Payload container IE to the event notification indicator.

In case n) in subclause5.4.5.3.1, the AMF shall:

a) set the Payload container type IE to "Multiple payloads";

b) set each payload container entry of the Payload container IE (see subclause9.11.3.39) as follows:

i) set the payload container type field of the payload container entry to a payload container type value set in the Payload container type IE as specified for cases a) to m) above;

ii) set the payload container entry contents field of the payload container entry to the payload container contents set in the Payload container IE as specified for cases a) to m) above;

iii) set the optional IE fields, if any, to the optional associated information as specified for cases a) to m) above.



Figure5.4.5.3.2.1: Network-initiated NAS transport procedure

5.4.5.3.3 Network-initiated NAS transport of messages

Upon reception of a DL NAS TRANSPORT message, the UE shall stop the timer T3346 if running.

Upon reception of a DL NAS TRANSPORT message, if the Payload container type IE is set to:

a) "N1 SM information" and the 5GMM cause IE is not included in the DL NAS TRANSPORT message, the 5GSM message in the Payload container IE and the PDU session ID are handled in the 5GSM procedures specified in clause6;

b) "SMS", the UE shall forward the content of the Payload container IE to the SMS stack entity;

c) "LTE Positioning Protocol (LPP) message container", the UE shall forward the payload container type, the content of the Payload container IE and the routing information included in the Additional information IE to the upper layer location services application;

d) "SOR transparent container" and if the Payload container IE:

1) successfully passes the integrity check (see 3GPPTS33.501[24]), the ME shall store the received SOR counter as specified in annexC and proceed as follows:

i) If the Payload container IE indicates a list of preferred PLMN/access technology combinations is provided and the list type indicates "PLMN ID and access technology list", then the ME shall replace the highest priority entries in the "Operator Controlled PLMN Selector with Access Technology" list stored in the ME;

ii) If the list type indicates "secured packet", then the ME shall behave as if a SMS is received with protocol identifier set to SIM data download, data coding scheme set to class 2 message and SMS payload as secured packet contents of SOR transparent container IE. The SMS payload is forwarded to UICC as specified in 3GPPTS23.040[4A]; 

iii) If the Payload container IE includes SOR-SNPN-SI, the ME shall replace SOR-SNPN-SI of the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or associated with the selected PLMN subscription, as specified in 3GPPTS23.122[5] with the received SOR-SNPN-SI; and

iv) If the SOR-CMCI is present, in plain text, and the Store SOR-CMCI in ME indicator is set to "Store SOR-CMCI in ME" then the UE shall store or delete the SOR-CMCI in the non-volatile memory of the ME as described in annexC.1;

 If the ACK bit of the SOR header for SOR data type in the SOR transparent container is set to "acknowledgement requested" and the list type indicates:

A) "PLMN ID and access technology list"; or

B) "secured packet" and the ME receives status bytes from the UICC indicating that the UICC has received the secured packet successfully;

 then the ME shall send an acknowledgement in the Payload container IE of an UL NAS TRANSPORT message with Payload type IE set to "SOR transparent container" as specified in subclause5.4.5.2.2. In the Payload container IE carrying the acknowledgement, the UE shall set the ME support of SOR-CMCI indicator to "SOR-CMCI supported by the ME". Additionally, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder and the UE is not operating in SNPN access operation mode, the UE may set the ME support of SOR-SNPN-SI indicator to "SOR-SNPN-SI supported by the ME".

 The UE shall proceed with the behaviour as specified in 3GPPTS23.122[5] annexC; or

2) does not successfully pass the integrity check (see 3GPPTS33.501[24]) then the UE shall discard the content of the payload container IE and proceed with the behaviour as specified in 3GPPTS23.122[5] annexC.

e) Void;

f) Void;

g) "N1 SM information" and:

1) the 5GMM cause IE is set to the 5GMM cause #22 "Congestion", the UE passes to the 5GSM sublayer an indication that the 5GSM message was not forwarded due to DNN based congestion control along with the 5GSM message from the Payload container IE of the DL NAS TRANSPORT message, and the time value from the Back-off timer value IE;

2) the 5GMM cause IE is set to the 5GMM cause #28 "Restricted service area", the UE passes to the 5GSM sublayer an indication that the 5GSM message was not forwarded due to service area restrictions along with the 5GSM message from the Payload container IE of the DL NAS TRANSPORT message, enters the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.NON-ALLOWED-SERVICE and, if the DL NAS TRANSPORT message is received over 3GPP access, performs the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update without waiting for the release of the N1 NAS signalling connection (see subclauses5.3.5 and 5.5.1.3);

3) the 5GMM cause IE is set to the 5GMM cause #65 "maximum number of PDU sessions reached", the UE passes to the 5GSM sublayer an indication that the 5GSM message was not forwarded because the PLMN's maximum number of PDU sessions has been reached, along with the 5GSM message from the Payload container IE of the DL NAS TRANSPORT message;

4) the 5GMM cause IE is set to the 5GMM cause #67 "insufficient resources for specific slice and DNN", the UE passes to the 5GSM sublayer an indication that the 5GSM message was not forwarded due to S-NSSAI and DNN based congestion control along with the 5GSM message from the Payload container IE of the DL NAS TRANSPORT message, and the time value from the Back-off timer value IE;

5) the 5GMM cause IE is set to the 5GMM cause #69 "insufficient resources for specific slice", the UE passes to the 5GSM sublayer an indication that the 5GSM message was not forwarded due to S-NSSAI only based congestion control along with the 5GSM message from the Payload container IE of the DL NAS TRANSPORT message, and the time value from the Back-off timer value IE;

5a) the 5GMM cause IE is set to the 5GMM cause #78 "PLMN not allowed to operate at the present UE location", the UE passes to the 5GSM sublayer an indication that the 5GSM message was not forwarded because the UE is registered to a PLMN via a satellite NG-RAN cell that is not allowed to operate at the present UE location along with the 5GSM message from the Payload container IE of the DL NAS TRANSPORT message;

6) the 5GMM cause IE is set to the 5GMM cause #90 "payload was not forwarded", the UE passes to the 5GSM sublayer an indication that the 5GSM message was not forwarded due to routing failure along with the 5GSM message from the Payload container IE of the DL NAS TRANSPORT message;

7) the 5GMM cause IE is set to the 5GMM cause #91 "DNN not supported or not subscribed in the slice", the UE passes to the 5GSM sublayer an indication that the 5GSM message was not forwarded because the DNN is not supported or not subscribed in a slice along with the 5GSM message from the Payload container IE of the DL NAS TRANSPORT message, and the time value from the Back-off timer value IE, if any;

8) the 5GMM cause IE is set to the 5GMM cause #92 "insufficient user-plane resources for the PDU session", the UE passes to the 5GSM sublayer an indication that the 5GSM message was not forwarded due to insufficient user-plane resources along with the 5GSM message from the Payload container IE of the DL NAS TRANSPORT message.

9) the 5GMM cause IE is set to the 5GMM cause #79 "UAS services not allowed", the UE passes to the 5GSM sublayer an indication that the 5GSM message was not forwarded because the UE is marked in the UE's 5GMM context that it is not allowed to request UAS services along with the 5GSM message from the Payload container IE of the DL NAS TRANSPORT message.

h) "UE policy container", the UE policy container in the Payload container IE is handled in the UE policy delivery procedures specified in AnnexD;

i) "UE parameters update transparent container" and if the Payload container IE

1) successfully passes the integrity check (see 3GPPTS33.501[24]), the ME shall store the received UE parameter update counter as specified in annexC and proceed as follows:

i) if the UE parameters update list includes a UE parameters update data set with UE parameters update data set type indicating "Routing indicator update data",

A) the ME shall behave as if an SMS is received with protocol identifier set to SIM data download, data coding scheme set to class 2 message and SMS payload as secured packet contents of UE parameters update transparent container IE. The SMS payload is forwarded to UICC as specified in 3GPPTS23.040[4A]; and

B) if the ACK bit of the UE parameters update header in the UE parameters update transparent container is set to "acknowledgment requested" and if the ME receives status bytes from the UICC indicating that the UICC has received the secured packet successfully, the ME shall send an acknowledgement in the Payload container IE of an UL NAS TRANSPORT message with Payload type IE set to "UE parameters update transparent container" as specified in subclause5.4.5.2.2; and

C) if the ME receives a REFRESH command from the UICC as specified in 3GPPTS31.111[22A] and if the REG bit of the UE parameters update header in the UE parameters update transparent container IE is set to "re-registration requested", and:

C1) the UE is registered over 3GPP access, then the UE shall wait until the emergency services over 3GPP access, if any, are completed, enter 5GMM-IDLE mode over 3GPP access or 5GMM-CONNECTED mode with RRC inactive indication, perform a de-registration procedure, and then delete its 5G-GUTI if the UE is registered to different PLMN or SNPN on non-3GPP access or the UE is not registered over non-3GPP access, or wait until the de-registration procedure over non-3GPP access specified in case C2) or C3) is completed before deleting its 5G-GUTI if the UE is registered to same PLMN or SNPN on non-3GPP access, and then initiate a registration procedure for initial registration as specified in subclause5.5.1.2;

C2) the UE is registered over non-3GPP access and does not have emergency services ongoing over non-3GPP access, then the UE shall locally release the N1 NAS signalling connection and enter 5GMM-IDLE mode over non-3GPP access, perform a de-registration procedure, and then delete its 5G-GUTI if the UE is registered to different PLMN or SNPN on 3GPP access or the UE is not registered over 3GPP access, or wait until the de-registration procedure over 3GPP access specified in case C1) is completed before deleting its 5G-GUTI if the UE is registered to same PLMN or SNPN on 3GPP access, and then initiate a registration procedure for initial registration as specified in subclause 5.5.1.2; and

C3) the UE is registered over non-3GPP access and has an emergency services ongoing over non-3GPP access, then the UE shall wait until the emergency services are completed before locally releasing the N1 NAS signalling connection and enter 5GMM-IDLE mode over non-3GPP access, perform a de-registration procedure, and then delete its 5G-GUTI if the UE is registered to different PLMN or SNPN on 3GPP access or if the UE is not registered over 3GPP access, or wait until the de-registration procedure over 3GPP access specified in case C1) is completed before deleting its 5G-GUTI if the UE is registered to same PLMN or SNPN on 3GPP access, and then initiate a registration procedure for initial registration as specified in subclause 5.5.1.2.

ii) if the UE parameters update list includes a UE parameters update data set with UE parameters update data set type indicating "Default configured NSSAI update data",

A) if the ACK bit of the UE parameters update header in the UE parameters update transparent container is set to "acknowledgment requested" and if the UE parameters update list does not include a UE parameters update data set with UE parameters update data set type indicating "Routing indicator update data", the ME shall send an acknowledgement in the Payload container IE of an UL NAS TRANSPORT message with Payload type IE set to "UE parameters update transparent container" as specified in subclause5.4.5.2.2

B) the ME shall replace the stored default configured NSSAI with the default configured NSSAI included in the default configured NSSAI update data. In case of SNPN, the ME shall replace the stored default configured NSSAI associated with the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the PLMN subscription with the default configured NSSAI included in the default configured NSSAI update data; and

C) if the REG bit of the UE parameters update header in the UE parameters update transparent container is set to "re-registration requested" and the UE parameters update list does not include a UE parameters update data set with UE parameters update data set type indicating "Routing indicator update data", the UE shall wait until it enters 5GMM-IDLE mode and then the UE shall initiate a registration procedure for mobility registration update as specified in subclause 5.5.1.3.

 if the UE parameters update list does not include a UE parameters update data set with UE parameters update data set type indicating "Routing indicator update data", the UE used the old default configured NSSAI to create the requested NSSAI in a REGISTRATION REQUEST message, the UE does not have a configured NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN and the UE has an allowed NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN which contains one or more S-NSSAIs that are not included in the new default configured NSSAI, the UE shall wait until it enters 5GMM-IDLE mode and then the UE shall initiate a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update as specified in subclause5.5.1.3; and

iii) if the UE parameters update list includes a UE parameters update data set with UE parameters update data set type indicating "Disaster roaming information update data",

A) if the ACK bit of the UE parameters update header in the UE parameters update transparent container is set to "acknowledgment requested" and if the UE parameters update list does not include a UE parameters update data set with UE parameters update data set type indicating "Routing indicator update data" or a UE parameters update data set with UE parameters update data set type indicating "Default configured NSSAI update data", the ME shall send an acknowledgement in the Payload container IE of an UL NAS TRANSPORT message with Payload type IE set to "UE parameters update transparent container" as specified in subclause5.4.5.2.2;

B) the UE shall delete the indication of whether disaster roaming is enabled in the UE stored in the ME, if any, and store the indication of whether disaster roaming is enabled in the UE included in the disaster roaming information update data in the ME;

C) the UE shall delete the indication of 'applicability of "lists of PLMN(s) to be used in disaster condition" provided by a VPLMN' stored in the ME, if any, and store the indication of 'applicability of "lists of PLMN(s) to be used in disaster condition" provided by a VPLMN' included in the disaster roaming information update data in the ME; and

D) if the REG bit of the UE parameters update header in the UE parameters update transparent container is set to "re-registration requested" and the UE parameters update list does not include a UE parameters update data set with UE parameters update data set type indicating "Routing indicator update data", the UE shall wait until it enters 5GMM-IDLE mode and then the UE shall initiate a registration procedure for mobility registration update as specified in subclause 5.5.1.3.

iv) if the UE parameters update list includes a UE parameters update data set with UE parameters update data set type indicating "ME routing indicator update data":

A) if the ACK bit of the UE parameters update header in the UE parameters update transparent container is set to "acknowledgment requested" and the UE parameters update list does not include a UE parameters update data set with UE parameters update data set type indicating "Default configured NSSAI update data", the ME shall send an acknowledgement in the Payload container IE of an UL NAS TRANSPORT message with Payload type IE set to "UE parameters update transparent container" as specified in subclause5.4.5.2.2;

B) the UE shall set or replace the routing indicator of the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" with the routing indicator included in the ME routing indicator update data; and

C) if the REG bit of the UE parameters update header in the UE parameters update transparent container IE is set to "re-registration requested", and:

C1) the UE is registered over 3GPP access and is not registered over non-3GPP access, then the UE shall wait until the emergency services over 3GPP access, if any, are completed, enter 5GMM-IDLE mode over 3GPP access or 5GMM-CONNECTED mode with RRC inactive indication, perform a de-registration procedure, delete its 5G-GUTI, and then initiate a registration procedure for initial registration as specified in subclause5.5.1.2;

C2) the UE is registered over non-3GPP access and is not registered over 3GPP access, then the UE shall locally release the N1 NAS signalling connection and enter 5GMM-IDLE mode over non-3GPP access, perform a de-registration procedure, delete its 5G-GUTI, and then initiate a registration procedure for initial registration as specified in subclause 5.5.1.2; or

C3) the UE is registered over 3GPP access and non-3GPP access to same SNPN, then the UE shall wait until the emergency services over 3GPP access, if any, are completed, enter 5GMM-IDLE mode over 3GPP access or 5GMM-CONNECTED mode with RRC inactive indication over 3GPP access, perform a de-registration procedure over 3GPP access, locally release the N1 NAS signalling connection and enter 5GMM-IDLE mode over non-3GPP access, perform a de-registration procedure over non-3GPP access, delete its 5G-GUTI and then initiate a registration procedure for initial registration as specified in subclause 5.5.1.2.

NOTE: The term "non-3GPP access" in an SNPN refers to the case where the UE is accessing SNPN services via a PLMN.

2) does not successfully pass the integrity check (see 3GPPTS33.501[24]) then the UE shall discard the content of the payload container IE;

j) "Location services message container" and the 5GMM cause IE is not included in the DL NAS TRANSPORT message, the UE shall forward the payload container type, the content of the Payload container IE and the routing information in the Additional information IE if included to the upper layer location services application;

k) "CIoT user data container", the UE shall forward the content of the Payload container IE and the PDU session ID to the 5GSM sublayer;

l) "CIoT user data container" and:

1) the 5GMM cause IE is set to the 5GMM cause #22 "Congestion", the UE passes to the 5GSM sublayer an indication that the CIoT user data was not forwarded due to DNN based congestion control along with the CIoT user data from the Payload container IE of the DL NAS TRANSPORT message, and the time value from the Back-off timer value IE;

2) the 5GMM cause IE is set to the 5GMM cause #67 "insufficient resources for specific slice and DNN", the UE passes to the 5GSM sublayer an indication that the CIoT user data was not forwarded due to S-NSSAI and DNN based congestion control along with the CIoT user data from the Payload container IE of the DL NAS TRANSPORT message, and the time value from the Back-off timer value IE;

3) the 5GMM cause IE is set to the 5GMM cause #69 "insufficient resources for specific slice", the UE passes to the 5GSM sublayer an indication that the CIoT user data was not forwarded due to S-NSSAI only based congestion control along with the CIoT user data from the Payload container IE of the DL NAS TRANSPORT message, and the time value from the Back-off timer value IE;

4) the 5GMM cause IE is set to the 5GMM cause #90 "payload was not forwarded", the UE passes to the 5GSM sublayer an indication that the user data container was not forwarded due to routing failure along with the user data container from the Payload container IE and the PDU session ID from the PDU session ID IE of the DL NAS TRANSPORT message.

m) "service-level-AA container", the UE shall forward the content of the Payload container IE to the upper layers;

m1) "Event notification", the UE shall forward the received event notification indicator(s) to the upper layers (see 3GPPTS23.216[6A] and 3GPPTS24.237[14AA] for the "SRVCC handover cancelled, IMS session re-establishment required" indicator); or

n) "Multiple payloads", the UE shall first decode the content of the Payload container IE (see subclause9.11.3.39) to obtain the number of payload container entries and for each payload container entry, the UE shall:

1) decode the payload container type field;

2) decode the optional IE fields and the payload container contents field in the payload container entry; and

3) handle the content of each payload container entry the same as the content of the Payload container IE and the associated optional IEs as specified in bullets a) to m) above according to the payload container type field.

5.4.6 5GMM status procedure

5.4.6.1 General

The purpose of the 5GMM status procedure is to report at any time in the 5GMM STATUS message certain error conditions detected upon receipt of 5GMM protocol data in the AMF or in the UE. The 5GMM STATUS message can be sent by both the AMF and the UE (see example in figure5.4.6.1).



Figure5.4.6.1: 5GMM status procedure

5.4.6.2 5GMM status received in the UE

On receipt of a 5GMM STATUS message, no state transition and no specific action shall be taken as seen from the radio interface, i.e. local actions are possible. The local actions to be taken by UE on receipt of a 5GMM STATUS message are implementation dependent.

5.4.6.3 5GMM status received in the network

On receipt of a 5GMM STATUS message in the AMF, no state transition and no specific action shall be taken as seen from the radio interface, i.e. local actions are possible. The local actions to be taken by the AMF on receipt of a 5GMM STATUS message are implementation dependent.

5.4.7 Network slice-specific authentication and authorization procedure

5.4.7.1 General

The purpose of the network slice-specific authentication and authorization procedure is to enable the authentication, authorization and accounting server (AAA-S) via the Network Slice Specific and SNPN Authentication and Authorization Function (NSSAAF) to (re-)authenticate or (re-)authorize the upper layers of the UE.

The network slice-specific authentication and authorization procedure can be invoked for a UE supporting network slice-specific authentication and authorization procedure and for a HPLMN S-NSSAI or an SNPN S-NSSAI (see subclauses5.15.10 and 5.30.2.9 in 3GPPTS23.501[8] and subclause4.2.9.2 of 3GPPTS23.502[9]).

The network (re-)authenticates the UE using the EAP as specified in IETFRFC3748[34].

EAP has defined four types of EAP messages:

a) an EAP-request message;

b) an EAP-response message;

c) an EAP-success message; and

d) an EAP-failure message.

The EAP-request message is transported from the network to the UE using the NETWORK SLICE-SPECIFIC AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message of the network slice-specific EAP message reliable transport procedure.

The EAP-response message to the EAP-request message is transported from the UE to the network using the NETWORK SLICE-SPECIFIC AUTHENTICATION COMPLETE message of the network slice-specific EAP message reliable transport procedure.

If the (re-)authentication of the UE completes successfully or unsuccessfully, the EAP-success message or the EAP-failure message, respectively, is transported from the network to the UE using the NETWORK SLICE-SPECIFIC AUTHENTICATION RESULT message of the network slice-specific result message transport procedure.

There can be several rounds of exchange of an EAP-request message and a related EAP-response message for the AAA-S via the NSSAAF to complete the (re-)authentication and (re-)authorization of the request for an S-NSSAI (see example in figure5.4.7.1.1).

The AMF shall set the authenticator retransmission timer specified in subclause4.3 of IETFRFC3748[34] to infinite value.

NOTE: The network slice-specific authentication and authorization procedure provides a reliable transport of EAP messages and therefore retransmissions at the EAP layer of the AMF do not occur.



Figure5.4.7.1.1: Network slice-specific authentication and authorization procedure

5.4.7.2 Network slice-specific EAP message reliable transport procedure

5.4.7.2.1 Network slice-specific EAP message reliable transport procedure initiation

In order to initiate the network slice-specific EAP message reliable transport procedure, the AMF shall create a NETWORK SLICE-SPECIFIC AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message.

The AMF shall set the EAP message IE of the NETWORK SLICE-SPECIFIC AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message to the EAP-request message which is generated by the AMF or provided by the AAA-S via the NSSAAF.

The AMF shall set the S-NSSAI IE of the NETWORK SLICE-SPECIFIC AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message to the HPLMN S-NSSAI or the SNPN S-NSSAI to which the EAP-request message is related.

The AMF shall send the NETWORK SLICE-SPECIFIC AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message and start timer T3575 per S-NSSAI (see example in figure5.4.7.1.1).

Upon receipt of a NETWORK SLICE-SPECIFIC AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message, the UE shall stop timer T3346 if running. The UE shall pass:

a) the EAP-request message received in the EAP message IE; and

b) the HPLMN S-NSSAI or the SNPN S-NSSAI in the S-NSSAI IE;

to the upper layers. Apart from this action, the network slice-specific authentication and authorization procedure is transparent to the 5GMM layer of the UE.

5.4.7.2.2 Network slice-specific EAP message reliable transport procedure accepted by the UE

When the upper layers provide an EAP-response message associated with the HPLMN S-NSSAI or the SNPN S-NSSAI, the UE shall create a NETWORK SLICE-SPECIFIC AUTHENTICATION COMPLETE message.

The UE shall set the EAP message IE of the NETWORK SLICE-SPECIFIC AUTHENTICATION COMPLETE message to the EAP-response message.

The UE shall set the S-NSSAI IE of the NETWORK SLICE-SPECIFIC AUTHENTICATION COMPLETE message to the HPLMN S-NSSAI or the SNPN S-NSSAI associated with the EAP-response message.

The UE shall send the NETWORK SLICE-SPECIFIC AUTHENTICATION COMPLETE message. Apart from this action, the network slice-specific authentication and authorization procedure is transparent to the 5GMM layer of the UE.

Upon receipt of a NETWORK SLICE-SPECIFIC AUTHENTICATION COMPLETE message, the AMF shall stop timer T3575 and:

a) pass the EAP-response message received in the EAP message IE of the NETWORK SLICE-SPECIFIC AUTHENTICATION COMPLETE message associated with the HPLMN S-NSSAI or the SNPN S-NSSAI in the S-NSSAI IE to the upper layers; or

b) provide the EAP-response message received in the EAP message IE of the NETWORK SLICE-SPECIFIC AUTHENTICATION COMPLETE message associated with the HPLMN S-NSSAI or the SNPN S-NSSAI in the S-NSSAI IE to the AAA-S via the NSSAAF.

5.4.7.2.3 Abnormal cases on the network side

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a) T3575 expiry

 The AMF shall, on the first expiry of the timer T3575, retransmit the NETWORK SLICE-SPECIFIC AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message and shall reset and start timer T3575. This retransmission is repeated four times, i.e. on the fifth expiry of timer T3575, the AMF shall abort the network slice-specific authentication and authorization procedure for the S-NSSAI. The AMF shall consider that the network slice-specific authentication and authorization procedure for the S-NSSAI is completed as a failure.

b) Lower layers indication of non-delivered NAS PDU due to handover

 If the NETWORK SLICE-SPECIFIC AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message could not be delivered due to an intra AMF handover and the target TAI is included in the TAI list, then upon successful completion of the intra AMF handover the AMF shall retransmit the NETWORK SLICE-SPECIFIC AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message. If a failure of handover procedure is reported by the lower layer and the N1 NAS signalling connection exists, the AMF shall retransmit the NETWORK SLICE-SPECIFIC AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message.

c) Network slice-specific authentication and authorization procedure and de-registration procedure collision

 If the network receives a DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message before the ongoing network slice-specific authentication and authorization procedure has been completed and the access type included in the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message is the same as the one for which the network slice-specific authentication and authorization procedure is ongoing, the network shall abort the network slice-specific authentication and authorization procedure and shall progress the UE-initiated de-registration procedure. The AMF may initiate the network slice-specific authentication and authorization procedure for the S-NSSAI which is completed as a failure, if available. If the access type included in the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message is different from the one for which the network slice-specific authentication and authorization procedure is ongoing, the network shall proceed with both procedures.

5.4.7.2.4 Abnormal cases in the UE

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a) Transmission failure of the NETWORK SLICE-SPECIFIC AUTHENTICATION COMPLETE message with change in the current TAI

 If the current TAI is not in the TAI list, the network slice-specific authentication and authorization procedure shall be aborted and:

- if the UE is in 5GMM-REGISTERED state, a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update indicating "mobility registration updating" in the 5GS registration type IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message shall be initiated; and

- otherwise a registration procedure for initial registration shall be initiated.

b) Transmission failure of NETWORK SLICE-SPECIFIC AUTHENTICATION COMPLETE message indication without change in the current TAI

 It is up to the UE implementation how to re-run the ongoing procedure that triggered the network slice-specific authentication and authorization procedure.

c) Network slice-specific authentication and authorization procedure and de-registration procedure collision

 If the UE receives NETWORK SLICE-SPECIFIC AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message after sending a DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message and the access type included in the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message is the same as the access in which the NETWORK SLICE-SPECIFIC AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message is received, then the UE shall ignore the NETWORK SLICE-SPECIFIC AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message and proceed with the de-registration procedure. Otherwise, the UE shall proceed with both procedures.

5.4.7.3 Network slice-specific EAP result message transport procedure

5.4.7.3.1 Network slice-specific EAP result message transport procedure initiation

In order to initiate the network slice-specific EAP result message transport procedure, the AMF shall create a NETWORK SLICE-SPECIFIC AUTHENTICATION RESULT message.

The AMF shall set the EAP message IE of the NETWORK SLICE-SPECIFIC AUTHENTICATION RESULT message to the EAP-success or EAP-failure message provided by the AAA-S via the NSSAAF.

The AMF shall set the S-NSSAI IE of the NETWORK SLICE-SPECIFIC AUTHENTICATION RESULT message to the HPLMN S-NSSAI or the SNPN S-NSSAI to which the EAP-success or EAP-failure message is related.

The AMF shall send the NETWORK SLICE-SPECIFIC AUTHENTICATION RESULT message. The AMF shall retain the authentication result for the UE and the HPLMN S-NSSAI or the SNPN S-NSSAI while the UE is registered to the PLMN (see subclause5.15.10 in 3GPPTS23.501[8]).

Upon receipt of a NETWORK SLICE-SPECIFIC AUTHENTICATION RESULT message, the UE shall pass:

a) the EAP-success or EAP-failure message received in the EAP message IE; and

b) the HPLMN S-NSSAI or the SNPN S-NSSAI in the S-NSSAI IE;

to the upper layers. Apart from this action, the network slice-specific authentication and authorization procedure is transparent to the 5GMM layer of the UE.

5.5 5GMM specific procedures

5.5.1 Registration procedure

5.5.1.1 General

The registration procedure is always initiated by the UE and used for initial registration as specified in subclause5.5.1.2.2 or mobility and periodic registration update as specified in subclause5.5.1.3.2.

When the UE needs to initiate registration over both 3GPP access and non-3GPP access in the same PLMN (e.g. the 3GPP access and the selected N3IWF are located in the same PLMN), the UE:

a) in 5GMM-REGISTERED-INITIATED over 3GPP access shall not initiate registration over non-3GPP access; or

b) in 5GMM-REGISTERED-INITIATED over non-3GPP access shall not initiate registration over 3GPP access.

NOTE1: To which access (i.e. 3GPP access or non-3GPP access) the UE initiates registration first is up to UE implementation.

When the UE is registered with a PLMN over a non-3GPP access, the AMF and the UE maintain:

a) registration state and state machine over non-3GPP access;

b) 5G NAS security context;

c) 5G-GUTI;

d) registration area for non-3GPP access, which is associated with a single TAI; and

e) non-3GPP de-registration timer in the UE and non-3GPP implicit de-registration timer in the AMF.

A registration attempt counter is used to limit the number of subsequently rejected registration attempts. The registration attempt counter shall be incremented as specified in subclause5.5.1.2.7 or subclause5.5.1.3.7. Depending on the value of the registration attempt counter, specific actions shall be performed. The registration attempt counter shall be reset when:

- the UE is powered on;

- a USIM is inserted;

- a registration procedure is successfully completed;

- an EPS attach or combined EPS attach procedure is successfully completed in S1 mode and the UE is operating in single-registration mode. In this case, the UE shall reset the registration attempt counter for 3GPP access;

NOTE2: The registration attempt counter for non-3GPP access is not impacted by the EPS attach and the combined EPS attach procedure.

- a registration procedure is rejected with cause #11, #12, #13, #15, #27, #31, #62, #72, #73, #74, #75, #76, #77 or #78;

- a registration procedure is rejected with cause #3, #6 or #7, the REGISTRATION REJECT message is received without integrity protection and the counter for "SIM/USIM considered invalid for GPRS services" events has a value less than a UE implementation-specific maximum value.

- a network initiated deregistration procedure is completed with cause #11, #12, #13, #15, #27; #62, #72, #74, #75, #76, #77 or #78; or

- a new PLMN or SNPN is selected.

Additionally, the registration attempt counter shall be reset when the UE is in substate 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-REGISTRATION or 5GMM-REGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-REGISTRATION-UPDATE, and:

- the current TAI is changed;

- timer T3502 expires; or

- timer T3346 is started.

When the registration attempt counter is reset, the UE shall stop timer T3519 if running, and delete any stored SUCI.

The lower layers indicate to NAS whether the network supports emergency services for the UE in limited service state (see 3GPPTS38.331[30]). This information is taken into account when deciding whether to initiate an initial registration for emergency services.

5.5.1.2 Registration procedure for initial registration

5.5.1.2.1 General

This procedure can be used by a UE for initial registration for 5GS services.

When the UE initiates the registration procedure for initial registration, the UE shall indicate "initial registration" in the 5GS registration type IE. When the UE initiates the registration procedure for emergency services, the UE shall indicate "emergency registration" in the 5GS registration type IE. When the UE initiates the initial registration for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall indicate "SNPN onboarding registration" in the 5GS registration type IE. When the UE initiates the initial registration procedure for disaster roaming services, the UE shall indicate "disaster roaming initial registration" in the 5GS registration type IE.

If the MUSIM UE initiates the registration procedure for initial registration and indicates "emergency registration" in the 5GS registration type IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, the network shall not indicate the support of:

- the N1 NAS signalling connection release;

- the paging indication for voice services;

- the reject paging request; or

- the paging restriction;

in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

5.5.1.2.2 Initial registration initiation

The UE in state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED shall initiate the registration procedure for initial registration by sending a REGISTRATION REQUEST message to the AMF,

a) when the UE performs initial registration for 5GS services;

b) when the UE performs initial registration for emergency services;

c) when the UE performs initial registration for SMS over NAS;

d) when the UE moves from GERAN to NG-RAN coverage or the UE moves from a UTRAN to NG-RAN coverage and the following applies:

1) the UE initiated a GPRS attach or routing area updating procedure while in A/Gb mode or Iu mode; or

2) the UE has performed 5G-SRVCC from NG-RAN to UTRAN as specified in 3GPPTS23.216[6A],

 and since then the UE did not perform a successful EPS attach or tracking area updating procedure in S1 mode or registration procedure in N1 mode;

e) when the UE performs initial registration for onboarding services in SNPN; and

f) when the UE performs initial registration for disaster roaming services;

with the following clarifications to initial registration for emergency services:

a) the UE shall not initiate an initial registration for emergency services over the current access, if the UE is already registered for emergency services over the non-current access, unless the initial registration has to be initiated to perform handover of an existing emergency PDU session from the non-current access to the current access; and

NOTE1: Transfer of an existing emergency PDU session between 3GPP access and non-3GPP access is needed e.g. if the UE determines that the current access is no longer available.

b) the UE can only initiate an initial registration for emergency services over non-3GPP access if it cannot register for emergency services over 3GPP access.

The UE initiates the registration procedure for initial registration by sending a REGISTRATION REQUEST message to the AMF, starting timer T3510. If timer T3502 is currently running, the UE shall stop timer T3502. If timer T3511 is currently running, the UE shall stop timer T3511.

During initial registration the UE handles the 5GS mobile identity IE in the following order:

a) if:

1) the UE:

i) was previously registered in S1 mode before entering state EMM-DEREGISTERED; and

ii) has received an "interworking without N26 interface not supported" indication from the network; and

2) EPS security context and a valid native 4G-GUTI are available;

 then the UE shall create a 5G-GUTI mapped from the valid native 4G-GUTI as specified in 3GPPTS23.003[4] and indicate the mapped 5G-GUTI in the 5GS mobile identity IE. The UE shall include the UE status IE with the EMM registration status set to "UE is not in EMM-REGISTERED state" and shall include an ATTACH REQUEST message as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] in the EPS NAS message container IE.

 Additionally, if the UE holds a valid 5GGUTI, the UE shall include the 5G-GUTI in the Additional GUTI IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message in the following order:

1) a valid 5G-GUTI that was previously assigned by the same PLMN with which the UE is performing the registration, if available;

2) a valid 5G-GUTI that was previously assigned by an equivalent PLMN, if available; and

3) a valid 5G-GUTI that was previously assigned by any other PLMN, if available;

b) if:

1) the UE is registering with a PLMN and the UE holds a valid 5G-GUTI that was previously assigned, over 3GPP access or non-3GPP access, by the same PLMN with which the UE is performing the registration, the UE shall indicate the 5G-GUTI in the 5GS mobile identity IE; or

2) the UE is registering with a SNPN, the UE holds a valid 5G-GUTI that was previously assigned, over 3GPP access or non-3GPP access, by the same SNPN with which the UE is performing the registration, and the UE is not initiating the initial registration for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall indicate the 5G-GUTI in the 5GS mobile identity IE;

c) if the UE holds a valid 5G-GUTI that was previously assigned, over 3GPP access or non-3GPP access, by an equivalent PLMN, the UE shall indicate the 5G-GUTI in the 5GS mobile identity IE;

d) if:

1) the UE is registering with a PLMN and the UE holds a valid 5G-GUTI that was previously assigned, over 3GPP access or non-3GPP access, by any other PLMN, the UE shall indicate the 5G-GUTI in the 5GS mobile identity IE; or

2) the UE is registering with an SNPN, the UE holds a valid 5G-GUTI that was previously assigned, over 3GPP access or non-3GPP access, by any other SNPN, and the UE is not initiating the initial registration for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall indicate the 5G-GUTI in the 5GS mobile identity IE and shall additionally include the NID of the other SNPN in the NID IE;

e) if a SUCI other than an onboarding SUCI is available, and the UE is not initiating the initial registration for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall include the SUCI other than an onboarding SUCI in the 5GS mobile identity IE;

f) if the UE does not hold a valid 5G-GUTI or SUCI other than an onboarding SUCI, and is initiating the initial registration for emergency services, the PEI shall be included in the 5GS mobile identity IE; and

g) if the UE is initiating the initial registration for onboarding services in SNPN, an onboarding SUCI shall be included in the 5GS mobile identity IE.

NOTE2: The AMF in ON-SNPN uses the onboarding SUCI as specified in 3GPPTS23.501[8].

If the SUCI is included in the 5GS mobile identity IE and the timer T3519 is not running, the UE shall start timer T3519 and store the value of the SUCI sent in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message. The UE shall include the stored SUCI in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message while timer T3519 is running.

If the UE is operating in the dual-registration mode and it is in EMM state EMM-REGISTERED, the UE shall include the UE status IE with the EMM registration status set to "UE is in EMM-REGISTERED state".

NOTE3: Inclusion of the UE status IE with this setting corresponds to the indication that the UE is "moving from EPC" as specified in 3GPPTS23.502[9].

NOTE4: The value of the 5GMM registration status included by the UE in the UE status IE is not used by the AMF.

If the last visited registered TAI is available, the UE shall include the last visited registered TAI in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If the UE requests the use of SMS over NAS, the UE shall include the 5GS update type IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message with the SMS requested bit set to "SMS over NAS supported".  When the 5GS update type IE is included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST for reasons other than requesting the use of SMS over NAS, and the UE does not need to register for SMS over NAS, the UE shall set the SMS requested bit of the 5GS update type IE to "SMS over NAS not supported" in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If the UE supports MICO mode and requests the use of MICO mode, then the UE shall include the MICO indication IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message. If the UE requests to use an active time value, it shall include the active time value in the T3324 IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message. Additionally, if the UE supports strictly periodic registration timer, the UE shall set the Strictly Periodic Registration Timer Indication bit of the MICO indication IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message to "strictly periodic registration timer supported".

If the UE needs to use the UE specific DRX parameters, the UE shall include the Requested DRX parameters IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If the UE is in NB-N1 mode and if the UE needs to use the UE specific DRX parameters for NB-N1 mode, the UE shall include the Requested NB-N1 mode DRX parameters IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If the UE supports eDRX and requests the use of eDRX, the UE shall include the Requested extended DRX parameters IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If the UE needs to request LADN information for specific LADN DNN(s) or indicates a request for LADN information as specified in 3GPPTS23.501[8], the UE shall include the LADN indication IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and:

- request specific LADN DNNs by including a LADN DNN value in the LADN indication IE for each LADN DNN for which the UE requests LADN information; or

- to indicate a request for LADN information by not including any LADN DNN value in the LADN indication IE.

The UE shall include the requested NSSAI containing the S-NSSAI(s) corresponding to the slice(s) to which the UE intends to register with and shall include the mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the requested NSSAI, if available, in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message. If the UE has allowed NSSAI or configured NSSAI or both for the current PLMN or SNPN, the requested NSSAI shall be either:

a) the configured NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN, or a subset thereof as described below;

b) the allowed NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN, or a subset thereof as described below; or

c) the allowed NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN, or a subset thereof as described below, plus one or more S-NSSAIs from the configured NSSAI for which no corresponding S-NSSAI is present in the allowed NSSAI and those are neither in the rejected NSSAI nor in the pending NSSAI.

If the UE has neither allowed NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN nor configured NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN and has a default configured NSSAI, the UE shall:

a) include the S-NSSAI(s) in the Requested NSSAI IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message using the default configured NSSAI; and

b) include the Network slicing indication IE with the Default configured NSSAI indication bit set to "Requested NSSAI created from default configured NSSAI" in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If the UE has no allowed NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN, no configured NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN, and no default configured NSSAI, the UE shall not include a requested NSSAI in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If all the S-NSSAI(s) corresponding to the slice(s) to which the UE intends to register are included in the pending NSSAI, the UE shall not include a requested NSSAI in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

The subset of configured NSSAI provided in the requested NSSAI consists of one or more S-NSSAIs in the configured NSSAI applicable to the current PLMN or SNPN, if the S-NSSAI is neither in the rejected NSSAI nor associated to the S-NSSAI(s) in the rejected NSSAI. In addition, if the NSSRG information is available, the subset of configured NSSAI provided in the requested NSSAI shall be associated with at least one common NSSRG value. If the UE has already an allowed NSSAI for the other access, all the S-NSSAI(s) in the requested NSSAI for the current access shall share at least an NSSRG value common to all the S-NSSAI(s) of the allowed NSSAI for the other access. If the UE is simultaneously performing the registration procedure on the other access, the UE shall include S-NSSAIs that share at least a common NSSRG value across all access types.

NOTE5: If the UE has stored mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the rejected NSSAI, and one or more S-NSSAIs in the stored mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the configured NSSAI are not included in the stored mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the rejected NSSAI, then a S-NSSAI in the configured NSSAI associated to one or more of these mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the configured NSSAI are available to be included in the requested NSSAI together with their mapped S-NSSAI.

NOTE6: If one or more mapped S-NSSAIs in the stored mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the configured NSSAI are not included in the stored rejected NSSAI for the failed or revoked NSSAA, a S-NSSAI in the configured NSSAI associated to one or more of these mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the configured NSSAI are available to be included in the registration request together with their mapped S-NSSAI.

The subset of allowed NSSAI provided in the requested NSSAI consists of one or more S-NSSAIs in the allowed NSSAI for the current PLMN.

NOTE7: How the UE selects the subset of configured NSSAI or allowed NSSAI to be provided in the requested NSSAI is implementation specific. The UE can take preferences indicated by the upper layers (e.g. policies like URSP, applications) and UE local configuration into account.

NOTE8: The number of S-NSSAI(s) included in the requested NSSAI cannot exceed eight.

If the UE initiates an initial registration for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall not include the Requested NSSAI IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If the UE supports NSAG, the UE shall set the NSAG bit to "NSAG supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If the UE initiates an initial registration for emergency services or needs to prolong the established NAS signalling connection after the completion of the initial registration procedure (e.g. due to uplink signalling pending), the UE shall set the Follow-on request indicator to "Follow-on request pending".

NOTE9: The UE does not have to set the Follow-on request indicator to 1, even if the UE has to request resources for V2X communication over PC5 reference point, ProSe direct discovery over PC5 or ProSe direct communication over PC5.

If the UE supports S1 mode and the 5GS registration type IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message is not set to "disaster roaming initial registration", the UE shall:

- set the S1 mode bit to "S1 mode supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message;

- include the S1 UE network capability IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message; additionally, if the UE supports EPS-UPIP, the UE shall set the EPS-UPIP bit to "EPS-UPIP supported" in the S1 UE network capability IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message; and

- if the UE supports sending an ATTACH REQUEST message containing a PDN CONNECTIVITY REQUEST message with request type set to "handover" to transfer a PDU session from N1 mode to S1 mode, set the HO attach bit to "attach request message containing PDN connectivity request with request type set to handover to transfer PDU session from N1 mode to S1 mode supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If the UE supports the LTE positioning protocol (LPP) in N1 mode as specified in 3GPPTS37.355[26], the UE shall set the LPP bit to "LPP in N1 mode supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If the UE supports the Location Services (LCS) notification mechanisms in N1 mode as specified in 3GPPTS23.273[6B], the UE shall set the 5G-LCS bit to "LCS notification mechanisms supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If the UE is in NB-N1 mode, then the UE shall set the Control plane CIoT 5GS optimization bit to "Control plane CIoT 5GS optimization supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message. If the UE is capable of NB-S1 mode, then the UE shall set the Control plane CIoT EPS optimization bit to "Control plane CIoT EPS optimization supported" in the S1 UE network capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If the UE supports N3 data transfer and multiple user-plane resources in NB-N1 mode (see 3GPPTS36.306[25D], 3GPPTS36.331[25A]), then the UE shall set the Multiple user-plane resources support bit to "Multiple user-plane resources supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If the UE supports 5G-SRVCC from NG-RAN to UTRAN as specified in 3GPPTS23.216[6A], the UE shall:

- set the 5G-SRVCC from NG-RAN to UTRAN capability bit to "5G-SRVCC from NG-RAN to UTRAN supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message; and

- include the Mobile station classmark2 IE and the Supported codecs IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If the UE supports service gap control, then the UE shall set the SGC bit to "service gap control supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If the UE supports the restriction on use of enhanced coverage, the UE shall set the RestrictEC bit to "Restriction on use of enhanced coverage supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If the UE supports network slice-specific authentication and authorization, the UE shall set the NSSAA bit to "network slice-specific authentication and authorization supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If the UE supports CAG feature, the UE shall set the CAG bit to "CAG Supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If the UE supports extended CAG information list, the UE shall set the Ex-CAG bit to "Extended CAG information list supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

When the UE is not in NB-N1 mode, if the UE supports RACS, the UE shall:

a) set the RACS bit to "RACS supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message;

b) if the UE has an applicable network-assigned UE radio capability ID for the current UE radio configuration in the selected PLMN or SNPN, include the applicable network-assigned UE radio capability ID in the UE radio capability ID IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message; and

c) if the UE:

1) does not have an applicable network-assigned UE radio capability ID for the current UE radio configuration in the selected PLMN or SNPN; and

2) has an applicable manufacturer-assigned UE radio capability ID for the current UE radio configuration,

 include the applicable manufacturer-assigned UE radio capability ID in the UE radio capability ID IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If the UE has one or more stored UE policy sections:

- identified by a UPSI with the PLMN ID part indicating the HPLMN or the selected PLMN; or

- identified by a UPSI with the PLMN ID part indicating the PLMN ID part of the SNPN identity of the selected SNPN and associated with the NID of the selected SNPN;

then the UE shall set the Payload container type IE to "UE policy container" and include the UE STATE INDICATION message (see annexD) in the Payload container IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

NOTE10: In this version of the protocol, the UE can only include the Payload container IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message to carry a payload of type "UE policy container".

If the UE does not have a valid 5G NAS security context, the UE shall send the REGISTRATION REQUEST message without including the NAS message container IE. The UE shall include the entire REGISTRATION REQUEST message (i.e. containing cleartext IEs and non-cleartext IEs, if any) in the NAS message container IE that is sent as part of the SECURITY MODE COMPLETE message as described in subclauses4.4.6 and5.4.2.3.

If the UE has a valid 5G NAS security context and the UE needs to send non-cleartext IEs, the UE shall send a REGISTRATION REQUEST message including the NAS message container IE as described in subclause4.4.6. If the UE does not need to send non-cleartext IEs, the UE shall send a REGISTRATION REQUEST message without including the NAS message container IE.

If the UE supports ciphered broadcast assistance data and needs to obtain new ciphering keys, the UE shall include the Additional information requested IE with the CipherKey bit set to "ciphering keys for ciphered broadcast assistance data requested" in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

The UE shall set the WUSA bit to "WUS assistance information reception supported" in the 5GMM capability IE if the UE supports WUS assistance information. The UE may include its UE paging probability information in the Requested WUS assistance information IE if the UE has set the WUSA bit to "WUS assistance information reception supported" in the 5GMM capability IE and the UE is not performing the initial registration for emergency services.

The UE shall set the NR-PSSI bit to "NR paging subgrouping supported" in the 5GMM capability IE if the UE supports PEIPS assistance information and the 5GS registration type IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message is not set to "emergency registration". The UE may include its UE paging probability information in the Requested PEIPS assistance information IE if the UE has set the NR-PSSI bit to "NR paging subgrouping supported" in the 5GMM capability IE.

If the REGISTRATION REQUEST message includes a NAS message container IE, the AMF shall process the REGISTRATION REQUEST message that is obtained from the NAS message container IE as described in subclause4.4.6.

If the UE supports V2X as specified in 3GPPTS24.587[19B], the UE shall set the V2X bit to "V2X supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message. If the UE supports V2X communication over E-UTRA-PC5 as specified in 3GPPTS24.587[19B], the UE shall set the V2XCEPC5 bit to "V2X communication over E-UTRA-PC5 supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message. If the UE supports V2X communication over NR-PC5 as specified in 3GPPTS24.587[19B], the UE shall set the V2XCNPC5 bit to "V2X communication over NR-PC5 supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

The UE shall set the ER-NSSAI bit to "Extended rejected NSSAI supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If the UE supports the NSSRG, then the UE shall set the NSSRG bit to "NSSRG supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If the W-AGF acting on behalf of an N5GC device initiates an initial registration as specified in 3GPPTS23.316[6D], the W-AGF acting on behalf of the N5GC device shall include the N5GC indication IE with the N5GC device indication bit set to "N5GC device registration is requested" in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

When the UE supporting UAS services initiates an initial registration for UAS services, the UE shall include the service-level device ID in the Service-level-AA container IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and set the value to the CAA-level UAV ID. The UE shall include the service-level-AA server address in the Service-level-AA container IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and set the value to the USS address, if it is provided by the upper layers.

If the UE supports ProSe direct discovery as specified in 3GPPTS24.554[19E], the UE shall set the ProSe-dd bit to "ProSe direct discovery supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message. If the UE supports ProSe direct communication as specified in 3GPPTS24.554[19E], the UE shall set the ProSe-dc bit to "ProSe direct communication supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message. If the UE supports acting as ProSe layer-2 UE-to-network relay UE as specified in 3GPPTS24.554[19E], the UE shall set the ProSe-l2relay bit to "Acting as a ProSe layer-2 UE-to-network relay UE supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message. If the UE supports acting as ProSe layer-3 UE-to-network relay UE as specified in 3GPPTS24.554[19E], the UE shall set the ProSe-l3relay bit to "Acting as a ProSe layer-3 UE-to-network relay UE supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message. If the UE supports acting as ProSe layer-2 UE-to-network remote UE as specified in 3GPPTS24.554[19E], the UE shall set the ProSe-l2rmt bit to "Acting as a ProSe layer-2 UE-to-network remote UE supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message. If the UE supports acting as ProSe layer-3 UE-to-network remote UE as specified in 3GPPTS24.554[19E], the UE shall set the ProSe-l3rmt bit to "Acting as a ProSe layer-3 UE-to-network remote UE supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If the MUSIM UE supports the N1 NAS signalling connection release, then the UE shall set the N1 NAS signalling connection release bit to "N1 NAS signalling connection release supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message otherwise the UE shall not set the N1 NAS signalling connection release bit to "N1 NAS signalling connection release supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If the MUSIM UE supports the paging indication for voice services, then the UE shall set the paging indication for voice services bit to "paging indication for voice services supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message otherwise the UE shall not set the paging indication for voice services bit to "paging indication for voice services supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If the MUSIM UE supports the reject paging request, then the UE shall set the reject paging request bit to "reject paging request supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message otherwise the UE shall not set the reject paging request bit to "reject paging request supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If the MUSIM UE sets:

- the reject paging request bit to "reject paging request supported";

- the N1 NAS signalling connection release bit to "N1 NAS signalling connection release supported"; or

- both of them;

and supports the paging restriction, then the UE shall set the paging restriction bit to "paging restriction supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message otherwise the UE shall not set the paging restriction bit to "paging restriction supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If the UE supports MINT, the UE shall set the MINT bit to "MINT supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If the UE initiates the registration procedure for disaster roaming services, the UE has determined the MS determined PLMN with disaster condition as specified in 3GPPTS23.122[5] and:

a) the MS determined PLMN with disaster condition is the HPLMN and:

1) the Additional GUTI IE is included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and does not contain a valid 5G-GUTI that was previously assigned by the HPLMN; or

2) the Additional GUTI IE is not included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and the 5GS mobile identity IE contains neither the SUCI nor a valid 5G-GUTI that was previously assigned by the HPLMN; or

b) the MS determined PLMN with disaster condition is not the HPLMN and:

1) the Additional GUTI IE is included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and does not contain a valid 5G-GUTI that was previously assigned by the MS determined PLMN with disaster condition; or

2) the Additional GUTI IE is not included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and the 5GS mobile identity IE does not contain a valid 5G-GUTI that was previously assigned by the MS determined PLMN with disaster condition;

the UE shall include in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message the MS determined PLMN with disaster condition IE indicating the MS determined PLMN with disaster condition.

NOTE11:  If the UE initiates the registration procedure for disaster roaming services, and the MS determined PLMN with disaster condition cannot be determined when an NG-RAN cell of the PLMN broadcasts the disaster related indication as specified in 3GPPTS23.122[5], the UE does not include in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message the MS determined PLMN with disaster condition IE but includes the Additional GUTI IE or the 5GS mobile identity IE or both as specified in subclauses5.5.1.2.2.

If the UE supports event notification, the UE shall set the EventNotification bit to "Event notification supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder and the UE is in its HPLMN or EHPLMN or a subscribed SNPN, the UE shall set the SSNPNSI bit to "SOR-SNPN-SI supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.



Figure5.5.1.2.2.1: Registration procedure for initial registration

5.5.1.2.3 5GMM common procedure initiation

The network may initiate 5GMM common procedures, e.g. the identification, authentication and security procedures during the registration procedure, depending on the information received in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If two NAS security mode control procedures are needed to signal an entire unciphered REGISTRATION REQUEST message followed by signalling of selected EPS NAS security algorithms, both NAS security mode control procedures should be initiated as part of 5GMM common procedures of the ongoing registration procedure (see clause5.4.2.4).

During a registration procedure with 5GS registration type IE set to "emergency registration", if the AMF is configured to support emergency registration for unauthenticated SUCIs, the AMF may choose to skip the authentication procedure even if no 5G NAS security context is available and proceed directly to the execution of the security mode control procedure.

5.5.1.2.4 Initial registration accepted by the network

During a registration procedure with 5GS registration type IE set to "emergency registration", the AMF shall not check for mobility and access restrictions, regional restrictions or subscription restrictions, or CAG restrictions when processing the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If the initial registration request is accepted by the network, the AMF shall send a REGISTRATION ACCEPT message to the UE.

For each of the information elements: 5GMM capability, S1 UE network capability, and UE security capability, the AMF shall store all octets received from the UE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, up to the maximum length defined for the respective information element.

NOTE1: This information is forwarded to the new AMF during inter-AMF handover or to the new MME during inter-system handover to S1 mode.

The AMF shall assign and include a TAI list as a registration area the UE is registered to in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. The AMF shall not assign a TAI list containing both tracking areas in NB-N1 mode and tracking areas not in NB-N1 mode. The UE, upon receiving a REGISTRATION ACCEPT message, shall delete its old TAI list and store the received TAI list. If the REGISTRATION REQUEST message was received over non-3GPP access, the AMF shall include a single TAI in the TAI list.

NOTE2: For non-3GPP access, the operator can allocate a TAI per N3IWF, TNGF, TWIF or W-AGF. Each N3IWF, TNGF, TWIF or W-AGF is locally configured with a TAI. Each N3IWF, TNGF, TWIF or W-AGF can be configured with its own TAI value, or with the same TAI value as other N3IWFs, TNGFs, TWIFs or W-AGFs.

NOTE3: When assigning the TAI list, the AMF can take into account the eNodeB's capability of support of CIoT 5GS optimization.

The AMF may include service area restrictions in the Service area list IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. The UE, upon receiving a REGISTRATION ACCEPT message with the service area restrictions shall act as described in subclause5.3.5.

The AMF may also include a list of equivalent PLMNs in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. Each entry in the list contains a PLMN code (MCC+MNC). The UE shall store the list as provided by the network, and if the initial registration procedure is not for emergency services, the UE shall remove from the list any PLMN code that is already in the forbidden PLMN list as specified in subclause5.3.13A. In addition, the UE shall add to the stored list the PLMN code of the registered PLMN that sent the list. The UE shall replace the stored list on each receipt of the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. If the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message does not contain a list, then the UE shall delete the stored list.

If the initial registration procedure is not for emergency services, the UE is not registered for disaster roaming, and if the PLMN identity of the registered PLMN is a member of the forbidden PLMN list as specified in subclause5.3.13A, any such PLMN identity shall be deleted from the corresponding list(s).

If the Service area list IE is not included in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message, any tracking area in the registered PLMN and its equivalent PLMN(s) in the registration area is considered as an allowed tracking area as described in subclause5.3.5.

If the REGISTRATION REQUEST message contains the LADN indication IE, based on the LADN indication IE, UE subscription information, UE location and local configuration about LADN and:

- if the LADN indication IE includes requested LADN DNNs, the UE subscribed DNN list includes the requested LADN DNNs or the wildcard DNN, and the LADN service area of the requested LADN DNN has an intersection with the current registration area, the AMF shall determine the requested LADN DNNs included in the LADN indication IE as LADN DNNs for the UE;

- if no requested LADN DNNs included in the LADN indication IE and the wildcard DNN is included in the UE subscribed DNN list, the AMF shall determine the LADN DNN(s) configured in the AMF whose LADN service area has an intersection with the current registration area as LADN DNNs for the UE; or

- if no requested LADN DNNs included in the LADN indication IE and the wildcard DNN is not included in the UE subscribed DNN list, or if the UE subscribed DNN list does not include any of the DNN's in the LADN indication IE, the AMF shall determine the LADN DNN(s) included in the UE subscribed DNN list whose LADN service area has an intersection with the current registration area as LADN DNNs for the UE.

If the LADN indication IE is not included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, the AMF shall determine the LADN DNN(s) included in the UE subscribed DNN list whose service area has an intersection with the current registration area as LADN DNNs for the UE, except for the wildcard DNN included in the UE subscribed DNN list.

If the UE supports WUS assistance information and the AMF supports and accepts the use of WUS assistance information for the UE, then the AMF shall determine the negotiated UE paging probability information for the UE, store it in the 5GMM context of the UE, and if the UE is not performing the initial registration for emergency services, the AMF shall include it in the Negotiated WUS assistance information IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. The AMF may consider the UE paging probability information received in the Requested WUS assistance information IE when determining the negotiated UE paging probability information for the UE.

NOTE4: Besides the UE paging probability information requested by the UE, the AMF can take local configuration or previous statistical information for the UE into account when determining the negotiated UE paging probability information for the UE.

If the UE sets the NR-PSSI bit to "NR paging subgrouping supported" in the 5GMM capability IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and the AMF supports and accepts the use of PEIPS assistance information for the UE, then the AMF shall determine the Paging subgroup ID for the UE, store it in the 5GMM context of the UE, and shall include it in the Negotiated PEIPS assistance information IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message or in the Updated PEIPS assistance information IE in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message as part of the registration procedure. The AMF may consider the UE paging probability information received in the Requested PEIPS assistance information IE when determining the Paging subgroup ID for the UE.

NOTE5: Besides the UE paging probability information when provided by the UE, the AMF can also take local configuration, whether the UE is likely to receive IMS voice over PS session calls, UE mobility pattern or previous statistical information for the UE or information provided by the NG-RAN into account when determining the Paging subgroup ID for the UE.

The AMF shall include the LADN information which consists of the determined LADN DNNs for the UE and LADN service area(s) available in the current registration area in the LADN information IE of the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

The UE, upon receiving the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message with the LADN information, shall store the received LADN information. If there exists one or more LADN DNNs which are included in the LADN indication IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and are not included in the LADN information IE of the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message, the UE considers such LADN DNNs as not available in the current registration area.

The 5G-GUTI reallocation shall be part of the initial registration procedure. During the initial registration procedure, if the AMF has not allocated a new 5G-GUTI by the generic UE configuration update procedure, the AMF shall include in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message the new assigned 5G-GUTI together with the assigned TAI list.

If the UE has set the CAG bit to "CAG supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and the AMF needs to update the "CAG information list" stored in the UE, the AMF shall include the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

NOTE6: The "CAG information list" can be provided by the AMF and include no entry if no "CAG information list" exists in the subscription.

NOTE7: If the UE supports extended CAG information list, the CAG information list can be included either in the CAG information list IE or Extended CAG information list IE.

If the UE does not support extended CAG information list, the CAG information list shall not be included in the Extended CAG information list IE.

If a 5G-GUTI or the SOR transparent container IE is included in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message, the AMF shall start timer T3550 and enter state 5GMM-COMMON-PROCEDURE-INITIATED as described in subclause5.1.3.2.3.3.

If the Operator-defined access category definitions IE, the Extended emergency number list IE, the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE are included in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message, the AMF shall start timer T3550 and enter state 5GMM-COMMON-PROCEDURE-INITIATED as described in subclause5.1.3.2.3.3.

If the UE is not in NB-N1 mode and the UE has set the RACS bit to "RACS supported" in the 5GMM Capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, the AMF may include either a UE radio capability ID IE or a UE radio capability ID deletion indication IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. If the UE radio capability ID IE or the UE radio capability ID deletion indication IE is included in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message, the AMF shall start timer T3550 and enter state 5GMM-COMMON-PROCEDURE-INITIATED as described in subclause5.1.3.2.3.3.

The AMF shall include the MICO indication IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message only if the MICO indication IE was included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, the AMF supports and accepts the use of MICO mode. If the AMF supports and accepts the use of MICO mode, the AMF may indicate "all PLMN registration area allocated" in the MICO indication IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. If "all PLMN registration area allocated" is indicated in the MICO indication IE, the AMF shall not assign and include the TAI list in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. If the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message included an MICO indication IE indicating "all PLMN registration area allocated", the UE shall treat all TAIs in the current PLMN as a registration area and delete its old TAI list. If "strictly periodic registration timer supported" is indicated in the MICO indication IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, the AMF may indicate "strictly periodic registration timer supported" in the MICO indication IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

The AMF shall include an active time value in the T3324 IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message if the UE requested an active time value in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and the AMF accepts the use of MICO mode and the use of active time.

The AMF shall include the T3512 value IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message only if the REGISTRATION REQUEST message was sent over the 3GPP access.

The AMF shall include the non-3GPP de-registration timer value IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message only if the REGISTRATION REQUEST message was sent over the non-3GPP access.

If the UE requests "control plane CIoT 5GS optimization" in the 5GS update type IE, indicates support of control plane CIoT 5GS optimization in the 5GMM capability IE and the AMF decides to accept the requested CIoT 5GS optimization and the registration request, the AMF shall indicate "control plane CIoT 5GS optimization supported" in the 5GS network feature support IE of the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

The AMF may include the T3447 value IE set to the service gap time value in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message if:

- the UE has indicated support for service gap control in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message; and

- a service gap time value is available in the 5GMM context.

If there is a running T3447 timer in the AMF and the Follow-on request indicator is set to "Follow-on request pending" in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, the AMF shall ignore the flag and proceed as if the flag was not received except for the following cases:

a) the UE is configured for high priority access in the selected PLMN; or

b) the 5GS registration type IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message is set to "emergency registration".

If the UE has indicated support for the control plane CIoT 5GS optimizations, and the AMF decides to activate the congestion control for transport of user data via the control plane, then the AMF shall include the T3448 value IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

If:

- the UE in NB-N1 mode is using control plane CIoT 5GS optimization; and

- the network is configured to provide the truncated 5G-S-TMSI configuration for control plane CIoT 5GS optimizations;

the AMF shall include the Truncated 5G-S-TMSI configuration IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message and set the "Truncated AMF Set ID value" and the "Truncated AMF Pointer value" in the Truncated 5G-S-TMSI configuration IE based on network policies. The AMF shall start timer T3550 and enter state 5GMM-COMMON-PROCEDURE-INITIATED as described in subclause5.1.3.2.3.3.

If the UE has included the service-level device ID set to the CAA-level UAV ID in the Service-level-AA container IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, and if:

- the UE has a valid aerial UE subscription information;

- the UUAA procedure is to be performed during the registration procedure according to operator policy;

- there is no valid successful UUAA result for the UE in the UE 5GMM context; and

- the REGISTRATION REQUEST message was not received over non-3GPP access,

then the AMF shall initiate the UUAA-MM procedure with the UAS-NF as specified in TS23.256[6AB] and shall include a service-level-AA pending indication in the Service-level-AA container IE of the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. The AMF shall store in the UE 5GMM context that a UUAA procedure is pending. The AMF shall start timer T3550 and enter state 5GMM-COMMON-PROCEDURE-INITIATED as described in subclause5.1.3.2.3.3. If the REGISTRATION REQUEST message was received over non-3GPP access, the AMF shall not initiate UUAA-MM procedure.

If the UE has included the service-level device ID set to the CAA-level UAV ID in the Service-level-AA container IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, and if:

- the UE has a valid aerial UE subscription information; 

- the UUAA procedure is to be performed during the registration procedure according to operator policy; and

- there is a valid successful UUAA result for the UE in the UE 5GMM context,

then the AMF shall include a service-level-AA response in the Service-level-AA container IE of the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message and set the SLAR field in the service-level-AA response to "Service level authentication and authorization was successful".

If the AMF determines that the UUAA-MM procedure needs to be performed for a UE, the AMF has not received the service-level device ID set to the CAA-level UAV ID in the Service-level-AA container IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message from the UE and the AMF decides to accept the UE to be registered for other services than UAS services based on the user's subscription data and the operator policy, the AMF shall accept the initial registration request and shall mark in the UE's 5GMM context that the UE is not allowed to request UAS services.

If the UE supports MINT, the AMF may include the List of PLMNs to be used in disaster condition IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

If the UE supports MINT, the AMF may include the Disaster roaming wait range IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

If the UE supports MINT, the AMF may include the Disaster return wait range IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

NOTE8: The AMF can determine the contents of the "list of PLMN(s) to be used in disaster condition", the value of the disaster roaming wait range and the value of the disaster return wait range based on the network local configuration.

If the AMF received the list of TAIs from the satellite NG-RAN as described in 3GPPTS23.501[8], and determines that any but not all TAIs in the received list of TAIs is forbidden for roaming or for regional provision of service as per information from the UDM and operator's choice, the AMF shall include the TAI(s) in:

a) the Forbidden TAI(s) for the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" IE; or

b) the Forbidden TAI(s) for the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service" IE; or

c) both;

in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

NOTE9: "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" corresponds to cause values #13 and #15, and "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service" corresponds cause value #12.

Upon receipt of the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message, the UE shall reset the registration attempt counter, enter state 5GMM-REGISTERED and set the 5GS update status to 5U1 UPDATED.

If the UE receives the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message from a PLMN, then the UE shall reset the PLMN-specific attempt counter for that PLMN for the specific access type for which the message was received. The UE shall also reset the PLMN-specific N1 mode attempt counter for that PLMN for the specific access type for which the message was received. If the message was received via 3GPP access, the UE shall reset the counter for "SIM/USIM considered invalid for GPRS services" events and the counter for "SIM/USIM considered invalid for non-GPRS services" events, if any. If the message was received via non-3GPP access, the UE shall reset the counter for "USIM considered invalid for 5GS services over non-3GPP" events.

If the UE receives the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message from an SNPN, then the UE shall reset the SNPN-specific attempt counter for the current SNPN for the specific access type for which the message was received. If the message was received via 3GPP access, the UE shall reset the counter for "the entry for the current SNPN considered invalid for 3GPP access" events. If the message was received via non-3GPP access, the UE shall reset the counter for "the entry for the current SNPN considered invalid for non-3GPP access" events.

If the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message included a T3512 value IE, the UE shall use the value in the T3512 value IE as periodic registration update timer (T3512).

If the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message include a T3324 value IE, the UE shall use the value in the T3324 value IE as active timer (T3324).

If the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message included a non-3GPP de-registration timer value IE, the UE shall use the value in non-3GPP de-registration timer value IE as non-3GPP de-registration timer.

If the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message contained a 5G-GUTI, the UE shall return a REGISTRATION COMPLETE message to the AMF to acknowledge the received 5G-GUTI, stop timer T3519 if running, and delete any stored SUCI. The UE shall provide the 5G-GUTI to the lower layer of 3GPP access if the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message is sent over the non-3GPP access, and the UE is in 5GMM-REGISTERED in both 3GPP access and non-3GPP access in the same PLMN.

If the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message contains the Network slicing indication IE with the Network slicing subscription change indication set to "Network slicing subscription changed", or contains a configured NSSAI IE with a new configured NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN and optionally the mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the configured NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN, the UE shall return a REGISTRATION COMPLETE message to the AMF to acknowledge the successful update of the network slicing information.

If the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message contains the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE and the UE had set the CAG bit to "CAG supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, the UE shall:

a) replace the "CAG information list" stored in the UE with the received CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE when received in the HPLMN or EHPLMN;

NOTE10: When the UE receives the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE in the HPLMN derived from the IMSI, the EHPLMN list is present and is not empty and the HPLMN is not present in the EHPLMN list, the UE behaves as if it receives the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE in a VPLMN.

b) replace the serving VPLMN's entry of the "CAG information list" stored in the UE with the serving VPLMN's entry of the received CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE when the UE receives the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE in a serving PLMN other than the HPLMN or EHPLMN; or

NOTE11: When the UE receives the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE in a serving PLMN other than the HPLMN or EHPLMN, entries of a PLMN other than the serving VPLMN, if any, in the received CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE are ignored.

c) remove the serving VPLMN's entry of the "CAG information list" stored in the UE when the UE receives the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE in a serving PLMN other than the HPLMN or EHPLMN and the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE does not contain the serving VPLMN's entry.

The UE shall store the "CAG information list" received in the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE as specified in annexC.

If the received "CAG information list" includes an entry containing the identity of the registered PLMN, the UE shall operate as follows:

a) if the UE receives the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message via a CAG cell, the entry for the registered PLMN in the received "CAG information list" does not include any of the CAG-ID(s) supported by the current CAG cell, and:

1) the entry for the registered PLMN in the received "CAG information list" does not include an "indication that the UE is only allowed to access 5GS via CAG cells", then the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE and shall search for a suitable cell according to 3GPPTS38.304[28] or 3GPPTS36.304[25C] with the updated "CAG information list"; or

2) the entry for the registered PLMN in the received "CAG information list" includes an "indication that the UE is only allowed to access 5GS via CAG cells" and:

i) if the entry for the registered PLMN in the received "CAG information list" includes one or more CAG-IDs, the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE and shall search for a suitable cell according to 3GPPTS38.304[28] with the updated "CAG information list"; or

ii) if the entry for the registered PLMN in the received "CAG information list" does not include any CAG-ID, the UE has not set the 5GS registration type IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message to "emergency registration", and the initial registration was not initiated to perform handover of an existing emergency PDU session from the non-current access to the current access, then the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH and shall apply the PLMN selection process defined in 3GPPTS23.122[5] with the updated "CAG information list"; or

b) if the UE receives the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message via a non-CAG cell and the entry for the registered PLMN in the received "CAG information list" includes an "indication that the UE is only allowed to access 5GS via CAG cells" and:

1) if the "allowed CAG list" for the registered PLMN in the received "CAG information list" includes one or more CAG-IDs, the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE and shall search for a suitable cell according to 3GPPTS38.304[28] with the updated "CAG information list"; or

2) if the entry for the registered PLMN in the received "CAG information list" does not include any CAG-ID, the UE has not set the 5GS registration type IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message to "emergency registration", and the initial registration was not initiated to perform handover of an existing emergency PDU session from the non-current access to the current access, then the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH and shall apply the PLMN selection process defined in 3GPPTS23.122[5] with the updated "CAG information list".

If the received "CAG information list" does not include an entry containing the identity of the registered PLMN and the UE receives the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message via a CAG cell, the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE and shall search for a suitable cell according to 3GPPTS38.304[28] or 3GPPTS36.304[25C] with the updated "CAG information list".

If the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message contains the Operator-defined access category definitions IE, the Extended emergency number list IE ,the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE, the UE shall return a REGISTRATION COMPLETE message to the AMF to acknowledge reception of the operator-defined access category definitions, the extended local emergency numbers list or the "CAG information list".

If the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message contains the UE radio capability ID IE or the UE radio capability ID deletion indication IE, the UE shall return a REGISTRATION COMPLETE message to the AMF to acknowledge reception of the UE radio capability ID IE or the UE radio capability ID deletion indication IE.

Upon receiving a REGISTRATION COMPLETE message, the AMF shall stop timer T3550 and change to state 5GMM-REGISTERED. The 5G-GUTI, if sent in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message, shall be considered as valid, and the UE radio capability ID, if sent in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT, shall be considered as valid.

If the 5GS update type IE was included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message with the SMS requested bit set to "SMS over NAS supported", and SMSF selection is successful, then the AMF shall send the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message after the SMSF has confirmed that the activation of the SMS service was successful. When sending the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message, the AMF shall:

a) set the SMS allowed bit of the 5GS registration result IE to "SMS over NAS allowed" in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message, if the UE has set the SMS requested bit of the 5GS update type IE to "SMS over NAS supported" in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and the network allows the use of SMS over NAS for the UE; and

b) store the SMSF address and the value of the SMS allowed bit of the 5GS registration result IE in the UE 5GMM context and consider the UE available for SMS over NAS.

If:

a) the SMSF selection in the AMF is not successful;

b) the SMS activation via the SMSF is not successful;

c) the AMF does not allow the use of SMS over NAS;

d) the SMS requested bit of the 5GS update type IE was set to "SMS over NAS not supported" in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message; or

e) the 5GS update type IE was not included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message;

then the AMF shall set the SMS allowed bit of the 5GS registration result IE to "SMS over NAS not allowed" in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

When the UE receives the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message, if the UE is also registered over another access to the same PLMN, the UE considers the value indicated by the SMS allowed bit of the 5GS registration result IE as applicable for both accesses over which the UE is registered.

The AMF shall include the 5GS registration result IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. If the 5GS registration result IE value indicates:

a) "3GPP access", the UE:

- shall consider itself as being registered to 3GPP access only; and

- if in 5GMM-REGISTERED state over non-3GPP access and on the same PLMN as 3GPP access, shall enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-REGISTRATION over non-3GPP access and set the 5GS update status to 5U2 NOT UPDATED over non-3GPP access;

b) "Non-3GPP access", the UE:

- shall consider itself as being registered to non-3GPP access only; and

- if in the 5GMM-REGISTERED state over 3GPP access and is on the same PLMN as non-3GPP access, shall enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-REGISTRATION over 3GPP access and set the 5GS update status to 5U2 NOT UPDATED over 3GPP access; or

c) "3GPP access and Non-3GPP access", the UE shall consider itself as being registered to both 3GPP access and non-3GPP access.

The AMF shall include the allowed NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN and shall include the mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the allowed NSSAI contained in the requested NSSAI from the UE if available, in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message if the UE included the requested NSSAI in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and the AMF allows one or more S-NSSAIs in the requested NSSAI.

The AMF may also include rejected NSSAI in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message if the initial registration request is not for onboarding services in SNPN. If the UE has set the ER-NSSAI bit to "Extended rejected NSSAI supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, the rejected NSSAI shall be included in the Extended rejected NSSAI IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message; otherwise the rejected NSSAI shall be included in the Rejected NSSAI IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. If the initial registration request is for onboarding services in SNPN, the AMF shall not include rejected NSSAI in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

If the UE has set the ER-NSSAI bit to "Extended rejected NSSAI supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, the rejected NSSAI contains S-NSSAI(s) which was included in the requested NSSAI but rejected by the network associated with rejection cause(s); otherwise the rejected NSSAI contains S-NSSAI(s) which was included in the requested NSSAI but rejected by the network associated with rejection cause(s) with the following restrictions:

a) rejected NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN shall not include an S-NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN which is associated to multiple mapped S-NSSAIs and some of these but not all mapped S-NSSAIs are not allowed; and

b) rejected NSSAI for the current registration area shall not include an S-NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN which is associated to multiple mapped S-NSSAIs and some of these but not all mapped S-NSSAIs are not allowed.

NOTE12: The UE that does not support extended rejected NSSAI can avoid requesting an S-NSSAI associated with a mapped S-NSSAI, which was included in the previous requested NSSAI but neither in the allowed NSSAI nor in the rejected NSSAI in the consequent registration procedures.

If the UE indicated the support for network slice-specific authentication and authorization, and if the Requested NSSAI IE includes one or more S-NSSAIs subject to network slice-specific authentication and authorization, the AMF shall in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message include:

a) the allowed NSSAI containing the S-NSSAI(s) or the mapped S-NSSAI(s), if any:

1) which are not subject to network slice-specific authentication and authorization and are allowed by the AMF; or

2) for which the network slice-specific authentication and authorization has been successfully performed;

b) optionally, the rejected NSSAI;

c) pending NSSAI containing one or more S-NSSAIs for which network slice-specific authentication and authorization (except for re-NSSAA) will be performed or is ongoing, and one or more S-NSSAIs from the pending NSSAI which the AMF provided to the UE during the previous registration procedure for which network slice-specific authentication and authorization will be performed or is ongoing, if any; and

d) the "NSSAA to be performed" indicator in the 5GS registration result IE set to indicate that the network slice-specific authentication and authorization procedure will be performed by the network, if the allowed NSSAI is not included in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

If the initial registration request is not for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE indicated the support for network slice-specific authentication and authorization, and:

a) the UE did not include the requested NSSAI in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message or none of the S-NSSAIs in the requested NSSAI in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message are allowed;

b) all default S-NSSAIs are subject to network slice-specific authentication and authorization; and

c) the network slice-specific authentication and authorization procedure has not been successfully performed for any of the default S-NSSAIs,

the AMF shall in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message include:

a) the "NSSAA to be performed" indicator in the 5GS registration result IE to indicate that the network slice-specific authentication and authorization procedure will be performed by the network;

b) pending NSSAI containing one or more default S-NSSAIs for which network slice-specific authentication and authorization will be performed or is ongoing and one or more S-NSSAIs from the pending NSSAI which the AMF provided to the UE during the previous registration procedure for which network slice-specific authentication and authorization will be performed or is ongoing (if any); and

c) optionally, the rejected NSSAI.

If the initial registration request is not for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE indicated the support for network slice-specific authentication and authorization, and:

a) the UE did not include the requested NSSAI in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message or none of the S-NSSAIs in the requested NSSAI in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message are allowed; and

b) one or more default S-NSSAIs are not subject to network slice-specific authentication and authorization or the network slice-specific authentication and authorization procedure has been successfully performed for one or more default S-NSSAIs;

the AMF shall in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message include:

a) pending NSSAI containing one or more default S-NSSAIs for which network slice-specific authentication and authorization will be performed or is ongoing (if any) and one or more S-NSSAIs from the pending NSSAI which the AMF provided to the UE during the previous registration procedure for which network slice-specific authentication and authorization will be performed or is ongoing (if any);

b) allowed NSSAI containing S-NSSAI(s) for the current PLMN each of which corresponds to a default S-NSSAI which are not subject to network slice-specific authentication and authorization or for which the network slice-specific authentication and authorization has been successfully performed;

c) allowed NSSAI containing one or more default S-NSSAIs, as the mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the allowed NSSAI in roaming scenarios, which are not subject to network slice-specific authentication and authorization or for which the network slice-specific authentication and authorization has been successfully performed; and

d) optionally, the rejected NSSAI.

If the UE did not include the requested NSSAI in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message or none of the S-NSSAIs in the requested NSSAI in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message are allowed, the allowed NSSAI shall not contain default S-NSSAI(s) that are subject to NSAC. If the subscription information includes the NSSRG information, the S-NSSAIs of the allowed NSSAI shall be associated with at least one common NSSRG value.

When the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message includes a pending NSSAI, the pending NSSAI shall contain all S-NSSAIs for which network slice-specific authentication and authorization (except for re-NSSAA) will be performed or is ongoing from the requested NSSAI of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message that was received over the 3GPP access, non-3GPP access, or both the 3GPP access and non-3GPP access.

If the UE supports extended rejected NSSAI and the AMF determines that maximum number of UEs reached for one or more S-NSSAI(s) in the requested NSSAI as specified in subclause4.6.2.5, the AMF shall include the rejected NSSAI containing one or more S-NSSAIs with the rejection cause "S-NSSAI not available due to maximum number of UEs reached" in the Extended rejected NSSAI IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. In addition, the AMF may include a back-off timer value for each S-NSSAI with the rejection cause "S-NSSAI not available due to maximum number of UEs reached" included in the Extended rejected NSSAI IE of the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. To avoid that large numbers of UEs simultaneously initiate deferred requests, the network should select the value for the backoff  timer for each S-NSSAI for the informed UEs so that timeouts are not synchronised.

If the UE does not indicate support for extended rejected NSSAI and the maximum number of UEs has been reached, the AMF should include the rejected NSSAI containing one or more S-NSSAIs with the rejection cause "S-NSSAI not available in the current registration area" in the Rejected NSSAI IE and should not include these S-NSSAIs in the allowed NSSAI in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

NOTE13: Based on network policies, the AMF can include the S-NSSAI(s) for which the maximum number of UEs has been reached in the rejected NSSAI with rejection causes other than "S-NSSAI not available in the current registration area".

The AMF may include a new configured NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message if:

a) the REGISTRATION REQUEST message did not include the requested NSSAI and the initial registration request is not for onboarding services in SNPN;

b) the REGISTRATION REQUEST message included the requested NSSAI containing an S-NSSAI that is not valid in the serving PLMN or SNPN;

c) the REGISTRATION REQUEST message included the requested NSSAI containing S-NSSAI(s) with incorrect mapped S-NSSAI(s);

d) the REGISTRATION REQUEST message included the Network slicing indication IE with the Default configured NSSAI indication bit set to "Requested NSSAI created from default configured NSSAI";

e) the S-NSSAIs of the requested NSSAI in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message are not associated with any common NSSRG value, except for the case that the AMF, based on the indication received from the UDM as specified in 3GPPTS23.501[8], has provided all subscribed S-NSSAIs in the configured NSSAI to a UE who does not support NSSRG; or

NOTE14: If the S-NSSAIs of the requested NSSAI in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message are not associated with any common NSSRG value, it is possible that at least one of the S-NSSAIs is not included in any of new allowed NSSAI, new (extended) rejected NSSAI (if applicable), and new pending NSSAI (if applicable).

f) the S-NSSAIs of the requested NSSAI in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message over the current access and the allowed NSSAI over the other access are not associated with any common NSSRG value.

If a new configured NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN is included in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message, the AMF shall also include the mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the configured NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN if available in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. In this case the AMF shall start timer T3550 and enter state 5GMM-COMMON-PROCEDURE-INITIATED as described in subclause5.1.3.2.3.3.

If a new configured NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN is included in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message, the AMF shall also include the mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the configured NSSAI for the current PLMN if available in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. In this case the AMF shall start timer T3550 and enter state 5GMM-COMMON-PROCEDURE-INITIATED as described in subclause5.1.3.2.3.3.

If a new configured NSSAI for the current PLMN is included in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message, the subscription information includes the NSSRG information, and the NSSRG bit in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message is set to:

a) "NSSRG supported", then the AMF shall include the NSSRG information in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message; or

b) "NSSRG not supported", then the configured NSSAI shall include one or more S-NSSAIs each of which is associated with all the NSSRG value(s) of the default S-NSSAI(s), or the configured NSSAI shall include, based on the indication received from the UDM as specified in 3GPPTS23.501[8], all subscribed S-NSSAIs even if these S-NSSAIs do not share any common NSSRG value.

If the UE has set the NSAG bit to "NSAG supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, the AMF may include the NSAG information IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

If the UE receives the NSAG information IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message, the UE shall store the NSAG information as specified in subclause 4.6.2.2.

If the UE requests ciphering keys for ciphered broadcast assistance data in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and the AMF has valid ciphering key data applicable to the UE's subscription and current tracking area, then the AMF shall include the ciphering key data in the Ciphering key data IE of the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

The AMF shall include the Network slicing indication IE with the Network slicing subscription change indication set to "Network slicing subscription changed" in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message if the UDM has indicated that the subscription data for network slicing has changed. In this case the AMF shall start timer T3550 and enter state 5GMM-COMMON-PROCEDURE-INITIATED as described in subclause5.1.3.2.3.3.

The UE that has indicated the support for network slice-specific authentication and authorization receiving the pending NSSAI in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message shall store the S-NSSAI(s) in the pending NSSAI as specified in subclause4.6.2.2. If the registration area contains TAIs belonging to different PLMNs, which are equivalent PLMNs, the UE shall store the received pending NSSAI for each of the equivalent PLMNs as specified in subclause 4.6.2.2. If the pending NSSAI is not included in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message and the "NSSAA to be performed" indicator is not set to "Network slice-specific authentication and authorization is to be performed" in the 5GS registration result IE of the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message, then the UE shall delete the pending NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN and its equivalent PLMN(s), if existing, as specified in subclause4.6.2.2.

The UE receiving the rejected NSSAI in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message takes the following actions based on the rejection cause in the rejected S-NSSAI(s):

"S-NSSAI not available in the current PLMN or SNPN"

 The UE shall add the rejected S-NSSAI(s) in the rejected NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN as specified in subclause4.6.2.2 and shall not attempt to use this S-NSSAI(s) in the current PLMN or SNPN until switching off the UE, the UICC containing the USIM is removed, the entry of the "list of subscriber data" with the SNPN identity of the current SNPN is updated, or the rejected S-NSSAI(s) are removed or deleted as described in subclause4.6.2.2.

"S-NSSAI not available in the current registration area"

 The UE shall add the rejected S-NSSAI(s) in the rejected NSSAI for the current registration area as specified in subclause4.6.2.2 and shall not attempt to use this S-NSSAI(s) in the current registration area until switching off the UE, the UE moving out of the current registration area, the UICC containing the USIM is removed, the entry of the "list of subscriber data" with the SNPN identity of the current SNPN is updated, or the rejected S-NSSAI(s) are removed or deleted as described in subclause4.6.2.2.

"S-NSSAI not available due to the failed or revoked network slice-specific authentication and authorization"

 The UE shall store the rejected S-NSSAI(s) in the rejected NSSAI for the failed or revoked NSSAA as specified in subclause4.6.2.2 and shall not attempt to use this S-NSSAI in the current PLMN or SNPN over any access until switching off the UE, the UICC containing the USIM is removed, the entry of the "list of subscriber data" with the SNPN identity of the current SNPN is updated, or the rejected S-NSSAI(s) are removed or deleted as described in subclause4.6.1 and 4.6.2.2.

"S-NSSAI not available due to maximum number of UEs reached"

 Unless the back-off timer value received along with the S-NSSAI is zero, the UE shall add the rejected S-NSSAI(s) in the rejected NSSAI for the maximum number of UEs reached as specified in subclause4.6.2.2 and shall not attempt to use this S-NSSAI in the current PLMN or SNPN over the current access until switching off the UE, the UICC containing the USIM is removed, the entry of the "list of subscriber data" with the SNPN identity of the current SNPN is updated, or the rejected S-NSSAI(s) are removed as described in subclause4.6.2.2.

NOTE15: If the back-off timer value received along with the S-NSSAI in the rejected NSSAI for the maximum number of UEs reached is zero as specified in subclause10.5.7.4a of TS24.008, the UE does not consider the S-NSSAI as the rejected S-NSSAI.

If there is one or more S-NSSAIs in the rejected NSSAI with the rejection cause "S-NSSAI not available due to maximum number of UEs reached", then for each S-NSSAI, the UE shall behave as follows:

a) stop the timer T3526 associated with the S-NSSAI, if running;

b) start the timer T3526 with:

1) the back-off timer value received along with the S-NSSAI, if a back-off timer value is received along with the S-NSSAI that is neither zero nor deactivated; or

2) an implementation specific back-off timer value, if no back-off timer value is received along with the S-NSSAI; and

c) remove the S-NSSAI from the rejected NSSAI for the maximum number of UEs reached when the timer T3526 associated with the S-NSSAI expires.

If the UE sets the NSSAA bit in the 5GMM capability IE to "Network slice-specific authentication and authorization not supported", and:

a) if the Requested NSSAI IE only includes the S-NSSAI(s) subject to network slice-specific authentication and authorization and one or more default S-NSSAIs (containing one or more S-NSSAIs each of which may be associated with a new S-NSSAI) which are not subject to network slice-specific authentication and authorization are available, the AMF shall in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message include:

1) the allowed NSSAI containing S-NSSAI(s) for the current PLMN or SNPN each of which corresponds to a default S-NSSAI which are not subject to network slice-specific authentication and authorization;

2) the allowed NSSAI containing the default S-NSSAIs, as the mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the allowed NSSAI in roaming scenarios, which are not subject to network slice-specific authentication and authorization; and

3) the rejected NSSAI containing the S-NSSAI(s) subject to network slice specific authentication and authorization with the rejection cause indicating "S-NSSAI not available in the current PLMN or SNPN", except if the UE has not set the ER-NSSAI bit to "Extended rejected NSSAI supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and the S-NSSAI(s) is associated to multiple mapped S-NSSAIs and some of these but not all mapped S-NSSAIs are subject to NSSAA; or

b) if the Requested NSSAI IE includes one or more S-NSSAIs subject to network slice-specific authentication and authorization, the AMF shall in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message include:

1) the allowed NSSAI containing the S-NSSAI(s) or the mapped S-NSSAI(s) which are not subject to network slice-specific authentication and authorization; and

2) the rejected NSSAI containing:

i) the S-NSSAI(s) subject to network slice specific authentication and authorization with the rejection cause indicating "S-NSSAI not available in the current PLMN or SNPN", except if the UE has not set the ER-NSSAI bit to "Extended rejected NSSAI supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and the S-NSSAI is associated to multiple mapped S-NSSAIs and some of these but not all mapped S-NSSAIs are subject to NSSAA; and

ii) the S-NSSAI(s) which was included in the requested NSSAI but rejected by the network associated with the rejection cause indicating "S-NSSAI not available in the current PLMN or SNPN" or the rejection cause indicating "S-NSSAI not available in the current registration area", if any.

If the UE does not indicate support for network slice-specific authentication and authorization, the initial registration request is not for onboarding services in SNPN, and if:

a) the UE did not include the requested NSSAI in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message; or

b) none of the S-NSSAIs in the requested NSSAI in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message are allowed;

and one or more default S-NSSAIs (containing one or more S-NSSAIs each of which may be associated with a new S-NSSAI) which are not subject to network slice-specific authentication and authorization are available, the AMF shall:

a) put the allowed S-NSSAI(s) for the current PLMN or SNPN each of which corresponds to a default S-NSSAI and not subject to network slice-specific authentication and authorization in the allowed NSSAI of the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message;

b) put the default S-NSSAIs and not subject to network slice-specific authentication and authorization, as the mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the allowed NSSAI in roaming scenarios, in the allowed NSSAI of the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message; and

c) determine a registration area such that all S-NSSAIs of the allowed NSSAI are available in the registration area.

If the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message contains the Network slicing indication IE with the Network slicing subscription change indication set to "Network slicing subscription changed", the UE shall delete the network slicing information for each and every PLMN except for the current PLMN as specified in subclause4.6.2.2.

If the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message contains the allowed NSSAI, then the UE shall store the included allowed NSSAI together with the PLMN identity of the registered PLMN or the SNPN identity of the registered SNPN and the registration area as specified in subclause4.6.2.2. If the registration area contains TAIs belonging to different PLMNs, which are equivalent PLMNs, the UE shall store the received allowed NSSAI in each of allowed NSSAIs which are associated with each of the PLMNs.

If the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message contains a configured NSSAI IE with a new configured NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN and optionally the mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the configured NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN, the UE shall store the contents of the configured NSSAI IE as specified in subclause4.6.2.2. In addition, if the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message contains an NSSRG information IE, the UE shall store the contents of the NSSRG information IE as specified in subclause4.6.2.2.

If the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message:

a) includes the 5GS registration result IE with the "NSSAA to be performed" indicator set to "Network slice-specific authentication and authorization is to be performed";

b) includes a pending NSSAI; and

c) does not include an allowed NSSAI,

the UE shall delete the stored allowed NSSAI, if any, as specified in subclause4.6.2.2, and the UE:

a) shall not initiate a 5GSM procedure except for emergency services ; and

b) shall not initiate a service request procedure except for cases f), i), m) and o) in subclause5.6.1.1;

c) shall not initiate an NAS transport procedure except for sending SMS, an LPP message, a location service message, an SOR transparent container, a UE policy container, a UE parameters update transparent container or a CIoT user data container;

until the UE receives an allowed NSSAI.

If the UE included S1 mode supported indication in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, the AMF supporting interworking with EPS shall set the IWK N26 bit to either:

a) "interworking without N26 interface not supported" if the AMF supports N26 interface; or

b) "interworking without N26 interface supported" if the AMF does not support N26 interface

in the 5GS network feature support IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

The UE supporting S1 mode shall operate in the mode for interworking with EPS as follows:

a) if the IWK N26 bit in the 5GS network feature support IE is set to "interworking without N26 interface not supported", the UE shall operate in single-registration mode;

b) if the IWK N26 bit in the 5GS network feature support IE is set to "interworking without N26 interface supported" and the UE supports dual-registration mode, the UE may operate in dual-registration mode; or

NOTE16: The registration mode used by the UE is implementation dependent.

c) if the IWK N26 bit in the 5GS network feature support IE is set to "interworking without N26 interface supported" and the UE only supports single-registration mode, the UE shall operate in single-registration mode.

The UE shall treat the received interworking without N26 interface indicator for interworking with EPS as valid in the entire PLMN and its equivalent PLMN(s).

The network informs the UE about the support of specific features, such as IMS voice over PS session, location services (5G-LCS), emergency services, emergency services fallback and ATSSS, in the 5GS network feature support information element. In a UE with IMS voice over PS session capability, the IMS voice over PS session indicator, the Emergency services support indicator, and the Emergency services fallback indicator shall be provided to the upper layers. The upper layers take the IMS voice over PS session indicator into account when selecting the access domain for voice sessions or calls. In a UE with LCS capability, location services indicator (5G-LCS) shall be provided to the upper layers. When initiating an emergency call, the upper layers also take the IMS voice over PS session indicator, the Emergency services support indicator, and the Emergency services fallback indicator into account for the access domain selection. In a UE with the capability for ATSSS, the network support for ATSSS shall be provided to the upper layers. If the UE receives the 5GS network feature support IE with the ATSSS support indicator set to "ATSSS not supported", the UE shall perform a local release of the MA PDU session, if any.

The AMF shall set the EMF bit in the 5GS network feature support IE to:

a) "Emergency services fallback supported in NR connected to 5GCN and E-UTRA connected to 5GCN" if the network supports the emergency services fallback procedure when the UE is in an NR cell connected to 5GCN or an E-UTRA cell connected to 5GCN;

b) "Emergency services fallback supported in NR connected to 5GCN only" if the network supports the emergency services fallback procedure when the UE is in an NR cell connected to 5GCN and does not support the emergency services fallback procedure when the UE is in an E-UTRA cell connected to 5GCN;

c) "Emergency services fallback supported in E-UTRA connected to 5GCN only" if the network supports the emergency services fallback procedure when the UE is in an E-UTRA cell connected to 5GCN and does not support the emergency services fallback procedure when the UE is in an NR cell connected to 5GCN; or

d) "Emergency services fallback not supported" if network does not support the emergency services fallback procedure when the UE is in any cell connected to 5GCN.

NOTE17: If the emergency services are supported in neither the EPS nor the 5GS homogeneously, based on operator policy, the AMF will set the EMF bit in the 5GS network feature support IE to "Emergency services fallback not supported".

NOTE18: Even though the AMF's support of emergency services fallback is indicated per RAT, the UE's support of emergency services fallback is not per RAT, i.e. the UE's support of emergency services fallback is the same for both NR connected to 5GCN and E-UTRA connected to 5GCN.

If the UE is not operating in SNPN access operation mode:

a) the network informs the UE that the use of access identity 1 is valid in the RPLMN or equivalent PLMN by setting the MPS indicator bit of the 5GS network feature support IE to "Access identity 1 valid", in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. Based on operator policy, the AMF sets the MPS indicator bit in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message based on the MPS priority information in the user's subscription context obtained from the UDM;

b) upon receiving a REGISTRATION ACCEPT message with the MPS indicator bit set to "Access identity 1 valid", the UE shall act as a UE with access identity 1 configured for MPS as described in subclause4.5.2, in all NG-RAN of the registered PLMN and its equivalent PLMNs. The MPS indicator bit in the 5GS network feature support IE provided in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message is valid until the UE receives a REGISTRATION ACCEPT message with the MPS indicator bit set to "Access identity 1 not valid" or until the UE selects a non-equivalent PLMN. Access identity 1 is only applicable while the UE is in N1 mode.

c) the network informs the UE that the use of access identity 2 is valid in the RPLMN or equivalent PLMN by setting the MCS indicator bit of the 5GS network feature support IE to "Access identity 2 valid", in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. Based on operator policy, the AMF sets the MCS indicator bit in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message based on the MCS priority information in the user's subscription context obtained from the UDM; and

d) upon receiving a REGISTRATION ACCEPT message with the MCS indicator bit set to "Access identity 2 valid", the UE shall act as a UE with access identity 2 configured for MCS as described in subclause4.5.2, in all NG-RAN of the registered PLMN and its equivalent PLMNs. The MCS indicator bit in the 5GS network feature support IE provided in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message is valid until the UE receives a REGISTRATION ACCEPT message with the MCS indicator bit set to "Access identity 2 not valid" or until the UE selects a non-equivalent PLMN. Access identity 2 is only applicable while the UE is in N1 mode.

If the UE is operating in SNPN access operation mode:

a) the network informs the UE that the use of access identity 1 is valid in the RSNPN by setting the MPS indicator bit of the 5GS network feature support IE to "Access identity 1 valid", in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. Based on operator policy, the AMF sets the MPS indicator bit in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message based on the MPS priority information in the user's subscription context obtained from the UDM;

b) upon receiving a REGISTRATION ACCEPT message with the MPS indicator bit set to "Access identity 1 valid", the UE shall act as a UE with access identity 1 configured for MPS as described in subclause4.5.2A, in all NG-RAN of the registered SNPN. The MPS indicator bit in the 5GS network feature support IE provided in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message is valid until the UE receives a REGISTRATION ACCEPT message with the MPS indicator bit set to "Access identity 1 not valid" or until the UE selects another SNPN. Access identity 1 is only applicable while the UE is in N1 mode.

c) the network informs the UE that the use of access identity 2 is valid in the RSNPN by setting the MCS indicator bit of the 5GS network feature support IE to "Access identity 2 valid", in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. Based on operator policy, the AMF sets the MCS indicator bit in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message based on the MCS priority information in the user's subscription context obtained from the UDM; and

d) upon receiving a REGISTRATION ACCEPT message with the MCS indicator bit set to "Access identity 2 valid", the UE shall act as a UE with access identity 2 configured for MCS as described in subclause4.5.2A, in all NG-RAN of the registered SNPN. The MCS indicator bit in the 5GS network feature support IE provided in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message is valid until the UE receives a REGISTRATION ACCEPT message with the MCS indicator bit set to "Access identity 2 not valid" or until the UE selects another SNPN. Access identity 2 is only applicable while the UE is in N1 mode.

If the UE indicates support for restriction on use of enhanced coverage in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and:

a) in WB-N1 mode, the AMF decides to restrict the use of CE mode B for the UE, then the AMF shall set the RestrictEC bit to "CE mode B is restricted";

b) in WB-N1 mode, the AMF decides to restrict the use of both CE mode A and CE mode B for the UE, then the AMF shall set the RestrictEC bit to " Both CE mode A and CE mode B are restricted"; or

c) in NB-N1 mode, the AMF decides to restrict the use of enhanced coverage for the UE, then the AMF shall set the RestrictEC bit to "Use of enhanced coverage is restricted",

in the 5GS network feature support IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

If the UE indicates support of the N1 NAS signalling connection release in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and the network decides to accept the N1 NAS signalling connection release, then the AMF shall set the N1 NAS signalling connection release bit to "N1 NAS signalling connection release supported" in the 5GS network feature support IE of the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

If the UE indicates support of the paging indication for voice services in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and the network decides to accept the paging indication for voice services, then the AMF shall set the paging indication for voice services bit to "paging indication for voice services supported" in the 5GS network feature support IE of the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. Upon receipt of REGISTRATION ACCEPT message with the paging indication for voice services bit set to "paging indication for voice services supported", the UE NAS layer informs the lower layers that paging indication for voice services is supported. Otherwise, the UE NAS layer informs the lower layers that paging indication for voice services is not supported.

If the UE indicates support of the reject paging request in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and the network decides to accept the reject paging request, then the AMF shall set the reject paging request bit to "reject paging request supported" in the 5GS network feature support IE of the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

If the UE indicates support of the paging restriction in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, and the AMF sets:

- the reject paging request bit to "reject paging request supported";

- the N1 NAS signalling connection release bit to "N1 NAS signalling connection release supported"; or

- both of them;

in the 5GS network feature support IE of the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message, and the network decides to accept the paging restriction, then the AMF shall set the paging restriction bit to "paging restriction supported" in the 5GS network feature support IE of the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

If the UE has set the Follow-on request indicator to "Follow-on request pending" in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, or the network has downlink signalling pending, the AMF shall not immediately release the NAS signalling connection after the completion of the registration procedure.

If the UE is authorized to use V2X communication over PC5 reference point based on:

a) at least one of the following bits in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message set by the UE, or already stored in the 5GMM context in the AMF during the previous registration procedure as follows:

1) the V2XCEPC5 bit to "V2X communication over E-UTRA-PC5 supported"; or

2) the V2XCNPC5 bit to "V2X communication over NR-PC5 supported"; and

b) the user's subscription context obtained from the UDM as defined in 3GPPTS23.287[6C];

the AMF should not immediately release the NAS signalling connection after the completion of the registration procedure.

If the UE is authorized to use ProSe services based on:

a) at least one of the following bits in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message set by the UE, or already stored in the 5GMM context in the AMF during the previous registration procedure as follows:

1) the ProSe direct discovery bit to "ProSe direct discovery supported"; or

2) the ProSe direct communication bit to "ProSe direct communication supported"; and

b) the user's subscription context obtained from the UDM as defined in 3GPPTS23.304[6E];

the AMF should not immediately release the NAS signalling connection after the completion of the registration procedure.

If the Requested DRX parameters IE was included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, the AMF shall include the Negotiated DRX parameters IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. The AMF may set the Negotiated DRX parameters IE based on the received Requested DRX parameters IE and operator policy if available.

If the Requested NB-N1 mode DRX parameters IE was included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, the AMF shall include the Negotiated NB-N1 mode DRX parameters IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. The AMF may set the Negotiated NB-N1 mode DRX parameters IE based on the received Requested NB-N1 mode DRX parameters IE and operator policy if available.

The AMF shall include the Negotiated extended DRX parameters IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message only if the Requested extended DRX parameters IE was included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, and the AMF supports and accepts the use of eDRX. The AMF may set the Negotiated extended DRX parameters IE based on the received Requested extended DRX parameters IE, operator policy, information from NG-RAN and the user's subscription context obtained from the UDM if available.

If:

a) the UE's USIM is configured with indication that the UE is to receive the SOR transparent container IE, the SOR transparent container IE included in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message does not successfully pass the integrity check (see 3GPPTS33.501[24]); and

b) if the UE attempts obtaining service on another PLMNs as specified in 3GPPTS23.122[5] annexC;

then the UE shall locally release the established N1 NAS signalling connection after sending a REGISTRATION COMPLETE message.

If:

a) the UE's USIM is configured with indication that the UE is to receive the SOR transparent container IE, the SOR transparent container IE is not included in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message; and

b) the UE attempts obtaining service on another PLMNs as specified in 3GPPTS23.122[5] annexC;

then the UE shall locally release the established N1 NAS signalling connection.

If:

a) the UE operates in SNPN access operation mode;

b) the ME is configured to indicate that the UE shall expect to receive the steering of roaming information during initial registration procedure for the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription;

c) the SOR transparent container IE included in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message does not successfully pass the integrity check (see 3GPPTS33.501[24]); and

d) the UE attempts obtaining service on another SNPN as specified in 3GPPTS23.122[5] annexC;

then the UE shall locally release the established N1 NAS signalling connection after sending a REGISTRATION COMPLETE message.

If:

a) the UE operates in SNPN access operation mode;

b) the ME is configured to indicate that the UE shall expect to receive the steering of roaming information during initial registration procedure for the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription;

c) the SOR transparent container IE is not included in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message; and

d) the UE attempts obtaining service on another SNPN as specified in 3GPPTS23.122[5] annexC;

then the UE shall locally release the established N1 NAS signalling connection.

If the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message includes the SOR transparent container IE and the SOR transparent container IE successfully passes the integrity check (see 3GPPTS33.501[24]), the ME shall store the received SOR counter as specified in annexC and proceed as follows:

a) the UE shall proceed with the behaviour as specified in 3GPPTS23.122[5] annexC; and

b) if the registration procedure is performed over 3GPP access and the UE attempts obtaining service on another PLMNs or SNPNs as specified in 3GPPTS23.122[5] annexC, then the UE may locally release the established N1 NAS signalling connection after sending a REGISTRATION COMPLETE message. Otherwise the UE shall send a REGISTRATION COMPLETE message and not release the current N1 NAS signalling connection locally. If an acknowledgement is requested in the SOR transparent container IE of the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message, the UE acknowledgement is included in the SOR transparent container IE of the REGISTRATION COMPLETE message. In the SOR transparent container IE carrying the acknowledgement, the UE shall set the ME support of SOR-CMCI indicator to "SOR-CMCI supported by the ME". Additionally, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder and the UE is not operating in SNPN access operation mode, the UE may set the ME support of SOR-SNPN-SI indicator to "SOR-SNPN-SI supported by the ME".

If the SOR transparent container IE successfully passes the integrity check (see 3GPPTS33.501[24]) and:

a) the list type indicates:

1) "PLMN ID and access technology list", and the SOR transparent container IE indicates a list of preferred PLMN/access technology combinations is provided, then the ME shall replace the highest priority entries in the "Operator Controlled PLMN Selector with Access Technology" list stored in the ME and shall proceed with the behaviour as specified in 3GPPTS23.122[5] annexC; or

2) "secured packet", then the ME shall behave as if a SMS is received with protocol identifier set to SIM data download, data coding scheme set to class 2 message and SMS payload as secured packet contents of SOR transparent container IE. The SMS payload is forwarded to UICC as specified in 3GPPTS23.040[4A] and the ME shall proceed with the behaviour as specified in 3GPPTS23.122[5] annexC; or

b) the list type indicates "PLMN ID and access technology list" and the SOR transparent container IE indicates "HPLMN indication that 'no change of the "Operator Controlled PLMN Selector with Access Technology" list stored in the UE is needed and thus no list of preferred PLMN/access technology combinations is provided'", the UE operates in SNPN access operation mode and the SOR transparent container IE includes SOR-SNPN-SI, the ME shall replace SOR-SNPN-SI of the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or associated with the selected PLMN subscription, as specified in 3GPPTS23.122[5] with the received SOR-SNPN-SI.

 If the SOR-CMCI is present and the Store SOR-CMCI in ME indicator is set to "Store SOR-CMCI in ME" then the UE shall store or delete the SOR-CMCI in the non-volatile memory of the ME as described in annexC.1.

 The UE shall proceed with the behaviour as specified in 3GPPTS23.122[5] annexC.

If the SOR transparent container IE does not pass the integrity check successfully, then the UE shall discard the content of the SOR transparent container IE.

If required by operator policy, the AMF shall include the NSSAI inclusion mode IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message (see table4.6.2.3.1 of subclause4.6.2.3). Upon receipt of the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message:

a) if the message includes the NSSAI inclusion mode IE, the UE shall operate in the NSSAI inclusion mode indicated in the NSSAI inclusion mode IE over the current access within the current PLMN or SNPN and its equivalent PLMN(s), if any, in the current registration area; or

b) otherwise:

1) if the UE has NSSAI inclusion mode for the current PLMN or SNPN and access type stored in the UE, the UE shall operate in the stored NSSAI inclusion mode;

2) if the UE does not have NSSAI inclusion mode for the current PLMN or SNPN and the access type stored in the UE and if the UE is performing the registration procedure over:

i) 3GPP access, the UE shall operate in NSSAI inclusion modeD in the current PLMN or SNPN and the current access type;

ii) untrusted non-3GPP access, the UE shall operate in NSSAI inclusion modeB in the current PLMN and the current access type; or

iii) trusted non-3GPP access, the UE shall operate in NSSAI inclusion modeD in the current PLMN and the current access type; or

3) if the 5G-RG does not have NSSAI inclusion mode for the current PLMN and wireline access stored in the 5G-RG, and the 5G-RG is performing the registration procedure over wireline access, the 5G-RG shall operate in NSSAI inclusion modeB in the current PLMN and the current access type.

The AMF may include operator-defined access category definitions in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

If the UE receives Operator-defined access category definitions IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message and the Operator-defined access category definitions IE contains one or more operator-defined access category definitions, the UE shall delete any operator-defined access category definitions stored for the RPLMN and shall store the received operator-defined access category definitions for the RPLMN. If the UE receives the Operator-defined access category definitions IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message and the Operator-defined access category definitions IE contains no operator-defined access category definitions, the UE shall delete any operator-defined access category definitions stored for the RPLMN. If the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message does not contain the Operator-defined access category definitions IE, the UE shall not delete the operator-defined access category definitions stored for the RPLMN.

If the UE has indicated support for service gap control in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and:

- the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message contains the T3447 value IE, then the UE shall store the new T3447 value, erase any previous stored T3447 value if exists and use the new T3447 value with the timer T3447 next time it is started; or

- the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message does not contain the T3447 value IE, then the UE shall erase any previous stored T3447 value if exists and stop the timer T3447 if running.

If the T3448 value IE is present in the received REGISTRATION ACCEPT message and the value indicates that this timer is neither zero nor deactivated, the UE shall:

a) stop timer T3448 if it is running; and

b) start timer T3448 with the value provided in the T3448 value IE.

If the UE is using 5GS services with control plane CIoT 5GS optimization, the T3448 value IE is present in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message and the value indicates that this timer is either zero or deactivated, the UE shall ignore the T3448 value IE and proceed as if the T3448 value IE was not present.

If the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message contains the Truncated 5G-S-TMSI configuration IE, then the UE shall store the included truncated 5G-S-TMSI configuration and return a REGISTRATION COMPLETE message to the AMF to acknowledge reception of the truncated 5G-S-TMSI configuration.

NOTE19: The UE provides the truncated 5G-S-TMSI configuration to the lower layers.

If the UE is not in NB-N1 mode, the UE has set the RACS bit to "RACS supported" in the 5GMM Capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message includes:

a) a UE radio capability ID deletion indication IE set to "Network-assigned UE radio capability IDs deletion requested", the UE shall delete any network-assigned UE radio capability IDs associated with the RPLMN or RSNPN and, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription stored at the UE, then the UE shall, after the completion of the ongoing registration procedure, initiate a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update as specified in subclause5.5.1.3.2 over the existing N1 NAS signalling connection; or

b) a UE radio capability ID IE, the UE shall store the UE radio capability ID as specified in annexC.

If the UE has included the service-level device ID set to the CAA-level UAV ID in the Service-level-AA container IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message contains the service-level-AA pending indication in the Service-level-AA container IE, the UE shall return a REGISTRATION COMPLETE message to the AMF to acknowledge reception of the service-level-AA pending indication, and the UE shall not attempt to perform another registration procedure for UAS services until the UUAA-MM procedure is completed, or to establish a PDU session for USS communication or a PDU session for C2 communication until the UUAA-MM procedure is completed successfully.

If the UE has included the service-level device ID set to the CAA-level UAV ID in the Service-level-AA container IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message does not contain the service-level-AA pending indication in the Service-level-AA container IE, the UE shall consider the UUAA-MM procedure is not triggered.

If the REGISTRATION REQUEST message includes the 5GS registration type IE set to "SNPN onboarding registration" or the network determines that the UE's subscription only allows for configuration of SNPN subscription parameters in PLMN via the user plane, the AMF may start an implementation specific timer for onboarding services when the network considers that the UE is in 5GMM-REGISTERED (i.e. the network receives the REGISTRATION COMPLETE message from UE).

NOTE20: If the AMF considers that the UE is in 5GMM-IDLE, when the implementation specific timer for onboarding services expires and the network considers that the UE is still in state 5GMM-REGISTERED, the AMF can locally de-register the UE; or if the UE is in 5GMM-CONNECTED, the AMF can initiate the network-initiated de-registration procedure (see subclause 5.5.2.3).

NOTE21: The value of the implementation specific timer for onboarding services needs to be large enough to allow a UE to complete the configuration of one or more entries of the "list of subscriber data" taking into consideration that configuration of SNPN subscription parameters in PLMN via the user plane or onboarding services in SNPN involves third party entities outside of the operator's network.

If the UE receives the List of PLMNs to be used in disaster condition IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message and the UE supports MINT, the UE shall delete the "list of PLMN(s) to be used in disaster condition" stored in the ME together with the PLMN ID of the RPLMN, if any, and may store the "list of PLMN(s) to be used in disaster condition" included in the List of PLMNs to be used in disaster condition IE in the ME together with the PLMN ID of the RPLMN.

If the UE receives the Disaster roaming wait range IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message and the UE supports MINT, the UE shall delete the disaster roaming wait range stored in the ME, if any, and store the disaster roaming wait range included in the Disaster roaming wait range IE in the ME.

If the UE receives the Disaster return wait range IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message and the UE supports MINT, the UE shall delete the disaster return wait range stored in the ME, if any, and store the disaster return wait range included in the Disaster return wait range IE in the ME.

If the 5GS registration type IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message is set to "disaster roaming initial registration" and:

a) the MS determined PLMN with disaster condition IE is included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, the AMF shall determine the PLMN with disaster condition in the MS determined PLMN with disaster condition IE;

b) the MS determined PLMN with disaster condition IE is not included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and the Additional GUTI IE is included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and contains 5G-GUTI of a PLMN of the country of the PLMN providing disaster roaming, the AMF shall determine the PLMN with disaster condition in the PLMN identity of the 5G-GUTI;

c) the MS determined PLMN with disaster condition IE and the Additional GUTI IE are not included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and:

1) the 5GS mobile identity IE contains 5G-GUTI of a PLMN of the country of the PLMN providing disaster roaming, the AMF shall determine the PLMN with disaster condition in the PLMN identity of the 5G-GUTI; or

2) the 5GS mobile identity IE contains SUCI of a PLMN of the country of the PLMN providing disaster roaming, the AMF shall determine the PLMN with disaster condition in the PLMN identity of the SUCI; or

d) the MS determined PLMN with disaster condition IE is not included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, NG-RAN of the PLMN providing disaster roaming broadcasts disaster roaming indication and:

- the Additional GUTI IE is included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and contains 5G-GUTI of a PLMN of a country other than the country of the PLMN providing disaster roaming; or

- the Additional GUTI IE is not included and the 5GS mobile identity IE contains 5G-GUTI or SUCI of a PLMN of a country other than the country of the PLMN providing disaster roaming;

 the AMF shall determine the PLMN with disaster condition based on the disaster roaming agreement arrangement between mobile network operators.

NOTE22: The disaster roaming agreement arrangement between mobile network operators is out scope of 3GPP.

If the AMF determines that a disaster condition applies to the PLMN with disaster condition, and the UE is allowed to be registered for disaster roaming services, the AMF shall set the Disaster roaming registration result value bit in the 5GS registration result IE to "no additional information" in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. If the AMF determines that the UE can be registered to the PLMN for normal service, the AMF shall set the Disaster roaming registration result value bit in the 5GS registration result IE to "request for registration for disaster roaming service accepted as registration not for disaster roaming service " in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

If the UE indicates "disaster roaming initial registration" in the 5GS registration type IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and the 5GS registration result IE value in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message is set to:

- "request for registration for disaster roaming service accepted as registration not for disaster roaming service", the UE shall consider itself registered for normal service. If the PLMN identity of the registered PLMN is a member of the forbidden PLMN list as specified in subclause5.3.13A, any such PLMN identity shall be deleted from the corresponding list(s); or

- "no additional information", the UE shall consider itself registered for disaster roaming.

If the UE receives the forbidden TAI(s) for the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message and if the TAI(s) included in the IE is not part of the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming", the UE shall store the TAI(s) included in the IE, if not already stored, into the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming".

If the UE receives the forbidden TAI(s) for the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service" IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message and if the TAI(s) included in the IE is not part of the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service", the UE shall store the TAI(s) included in the IE, if not already stored, into the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service".

5.5.1.2.5 Initial registration not accepted by the network

If the initial registration request cannot be accepted by the network, the AMF shall send a REGISTRATION REJECT message to the UE including an appropriate 5GMM cause value.

If the initial registration request is rejected due to general NAS level mobility management congestion control, the network shall set the 5GMM cause value to #22 "congestion" and assign a value for back-off timer T3346.

In NB-N1 mode, if the registration request is rejected due to operator determined barring (see 3GPPTS29.503[20AB]), the network shall set the 5GMM cause value to #22 "congestion" and assign a value for back-off timer T3346.

If the REGISTRATION REJECT message with 5GMM cause #76 or #78 was received without integrity protection, then the UE shall discard the message. If the REGISTRATION REJECT message with 5GMM cause #62 was received without integrity protected, the behaviour of the UE is specified in subclause5.3.20.2.

Based on operator policy, if the initial registration request is rejected due to core network redirection for CIoT optimizations, the network shall set the 5GMM cause value to #31 "Redirection to EPC required".

NOTE1: The network can take into account the UE's S1 mode capability, the EPS CIoT network behaviour supported by the UE or the EPS CIoT network behaviour supported by the EPC to determine the rejection with the 5GMM cause value #31 "Redirection to EPC required".

If the initial registration request is rejected because:

a) all the S-NSSAI(s) included in the requested NSSAI are rejected; and

b) the UE set the NSSAA bit in the 5GMM capability IE to:

1) "Network slice-specific authentication and authorization supported" and:

i) there are no default S-NSSAIs;

ii) all default S-NSSAIs are not allowed; or

iii) network slice-specific authentication and authorization has failed or been revoked for all default S-NSSAIs and based on network local policy, the network decides not to initiate the network slice-specific re-authentication and re-authorization procedures for any subscribed S-NSSAI marked as default requested by the UE; or

2) "Network slice-specific authentication and authorization not supported"; and

i) there are no default S-NSSAIs; or

ii) all default S-NSSAIs are either not allowed or are subject to network slice-specific authentication and authorization;

the network shall set the 5GMM cause value to #62 "No network slices available" and shall include the rejected S-NSSAI(s) in the rejected NSSAI of the REGISTRATION REJECT message. Otherwise, the network may include the rejected S-NSSAI(s) in the rejected NSSAI of the REGISTRATION REJECT message.

If the UE has set the ER-NSSAI bit to "Extended rejected NSSAI supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, the rejected S-NSSAI(s) shall be included in the Extended rejected NSSAI IE of the REGISTRATION REJECT message. Otherwise the rejected S-NSSAI(s) shall be included in the Rejected NSSAI IE of the REGISTRATION REJECT message.

If the UE supports extended rejected NSSAI and the AMF determines that maximum number of UEs reached for all S-NSSAIs in the requested NSSAI as specified in subclause4.6.2.5, the AMF shall include the rejected NSSAI containing one or more S-NSSAIs with the rejection cause "S-NSSAI not available due to maximum number of UEs reached" in the Extended rejected NSSAI IE in the REGISTRATION REJECT message. In addition, the AMF may include a back-off timer value for each S-NSSAI with the rejection cause "S-NSSAI not available due to maximum number of UEs reached" in the Extended rejected NSSAI IE of the REGISTRATION REJECT message.

If the AMF receives the initial registration request along with the authenticated indication over N2 reference point on non-3GPP access and does not receive the indication that authentication by the home network is not required over N12 reference point, the network shall set the 5GMM cause value to #72 "Non-3GPP access to 5GCN not allowed".

If the initial registration request from a UE supporting CAG is rejected due to CAG restrictions, the network shall set the 5GMM cause value to #76 "Not authorized for this CAG or authorized for CAG cells only" and should include the "CAG information list" in the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE in the REGISTRATION REJECT message.

NOTE2: The network cannot be certain that "CAG information list" stored in the UE is updated as result of sending of the REGISTRATION REJECT message with the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE, as the REGISTRATION REJECT message is not necessarily delivered to the UE (e.g. due to abnormal radio conditions).

NOTE3: The "CAG information list" can be provided by the AMF and include no entry if no "CAG information list" exists in the subscription.

NOTE4: If the UE supports extended CAG information list, the CAG information list can be included either in the CAG information list IE or Extended CAG information list IE.

If the UE does not support extended CAG information list, the CAG information list shall not be included in the Extended CAG information list IE.

If the initial registration request from a UE not supporting CAG is rejected due to CAG restrictions, the network shall operate as described in bulletj) of subclause5.5.1.2.8.

If the UE's initial registration request is via a satellite NG-RAN cell and the network using the User Location Information provided by the NG-RAN, see 3GPPTS38.413[31], is able to determine that the UE is in a location where the network is not allowed to operate, the network shall set the 5GMM cause value in the REGISTRATION REJECT message to #78 "PLMN not allowed to operate at the present UE location".

NOTE5: When the UE is accessing network for emergency services, it is up to operator and regulatory policies whether the network needs to determine if the UE is in a location where network is not allowed to operate.

If the AMF receives the initial registration request including the service-level device ID set to the CAA-level UAV ID in the Service-level-AA container IE and the AMF determines that the UE is not allowed to use UAS services via 5GS based on the user's subscription data and the operator policy, the AMF shall return a REGISTRATION REJECT message with 5GMM cause #79 (UAS services not allowed).

If the UE initiates the registration procedure for disaster roaming and the AMF determines that it does not support providing disaster roaming services for the determined PLMN with disaster condition to the UE, then the AMF shall send a REGISTRATION REJECT message with 5GMM cause #80 (Disaster roaming for the determined PLMN with disaster condition not allowed).

Regardless of the 5GMM cause value received in the REGISTRATION REJECT message,

- if the UE receives the Forbidden TAI(s) for the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" IE in the REGISTRATION REJECT message and if the TAI(s) included in the IE is not part of the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming", the UE shall store the TAI(s) included in the IE, if not already stored, into the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" and remove the TAI(s) from the stored TAI list if present; and

- if the UE receives the Forbidden TAI(s) for the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service" IE in the REGISTRATION REJECT message and if the TAI(s) included in the IE is not part of the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service", the UE shall store the TAI(s) included in the IE, if not already stored, into the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service" and remove the TAI(s) from the stored TAI list if present.

Furthermore, the UE shall take the following actions depending on the 5GMM cause value received in the REGISTRATION REJECT message.

#3 (Illegal UE); or

#6 (Illegal ME).

 The UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2) and shall delete any 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and ngKSI.

 In case of PLMN, the UE shall consider the USIM as invalid for 5GS services until switching off, the UICC containing the USIM is removed or the timer T3245 expires as described in clause5.3.19a.1;

 In case of SNPN, if the UE is not performing initial registration for onboarding services in SNPN and the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the UE shall consider the entry of the "list of subscriber data" with the SNPN identity of the current SNPN as invalid until the UE is switched off, the entry is updated or the timer T3245 expires as described in clause5.3.19a.2. In case of SNPN, if the UE is not performing initial registration for onboarding services in SNPN and the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the UE shall consider the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" as invalid for 3GPP access until the UE is switched off, the entry is updated or the timer T3245 expires as described in clause5.3.19a.2. Additionally, if EAP based primary authentication and key agreement procedure using EAP-AKA' or 5G AKA based primary authentication and key agreement procedure was performed in the current SNPN, the UE shall consider the USIM as invalid for the current SNPN until switching off, the UICC containing the USIM is removed or the timer T3245 expires as described in clause5.3.19a.2.

 If the UE is not performing initial registration for onboarding services in SNPN and the UE shall delete the list of equivalent PLMNs (if any) and enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.NO-SUPI. If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS, then the UE shall:

1) set the counter for "SIM/USIM considered invalid for GPRS services" events and the counter for "USIM considered invalid for 5GS services over non-3GPP access" events in case of PLMN if the UE maintains these counters; or

2) set the counter for "the entry for the current SNPN considered invalid for 3GPP access" events and the counter for "the entry for the current SNPN considered invalid for non-3GPP access" events in case of SNPN if the UE maintains these counters;

 to a UE implementation-specific maximum value.

3) delete the 5GMM parameters stored in non-volatile memory of the ME as specified in annexC.

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall handle the EMM parameters EMM state, EPS update status, 4G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and eKSI as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] for the case when the EPS attach request procedure is rejected with the EMM cause with the same value. The USIM shall be considered as invalid also for non-EPS services until switching off, the UICC containing the USIM is removed or the timer T3245 expires as described in clause5.3.7a in 3GPPTS24.301[15]. If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS and the UE maintains a counter for "SIM/USIM considered invalid for non-GPRS services", then the UE shall set this counter to a UE implementation-specific maximum value.

 If the UE is performing initial registration for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall reset the registration attempt counter, store the SNPN identity in the "permanently forbidden SNPNs" list for onboarding services, enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH, and perform an SNPN selection or an SNPN selection for onboarding services according to 3GPPTS23.122[5]. If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS, the UE shall set the SNPN-specific attempt counter for the current SNPN to the UE implementation-specific maximum value.

 If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS and the UE also supports the registration procedure over the other access, the UE shall in addition handle 5GMM parameters and 5GMM state for this access, as described for this 5GMM cause value.

#7 (5GS services not allowed).

 The UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2) and shall delete any 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and ngKSI.

 In case of PLMN, the UE shall consider the USIM as invalid for 5GS services until switching off, the UICC containing the USIM is removed or the timer T3245 expires as described in clause5.3.19a.1;

 In case of SNPN, if the UE is not performing initial registration for onboarding services in SNPN and the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the UE shall consider the entry of the "list of subscriber data" with the SNPN identity of the current SNPN as invalid for 5GS services until the UE is switched off, the entry is updated or the timer T3245 expires as described in clause5.3.19a.2. In case of SNPN, if the UE is not performing initial registration for onboarding services in SNPN and the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the UE shall consider the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" as invalid for 3GPP access until the UE is switched off, the entry is updated or the timer T3245 expires as described in clause5.3.19a.2. Additionally, if EAP based primary authentication and key agreement procedure using EAP-AKA' or 5G AKA based primary authentication and key agreement procedure was performed in the current SNPN, the UE shall consider the USIM as invalid for the current SNPN until switching off, the UICC containing the USIM is removed or the timer T3245 expires as described in clause5.3.19a.2.

 If the UE is not performing initial registration for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.NO-SUPI. If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS, then the UE shall:

1) set the counter for "SIM/USIM considered invalid for GPRS services" events and the counter for "USIM considered invalid for 5GS services over non-3GPP access" events in case of PLMN if the UE maintains these counters; or

2) set the counter for "the entry for the current SNPN considered invalid for 3GPP access" events and the counter for "the entry for the current SNPN considered invalid for non-3GPP access" events in case of SNPN if the UE maintains these counters;

 to a UE implementation-specific maximum value.

3) delete the 5GMM parameters stored in non-volatile memory of the ME as specified in annexC.

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall handle the EMM parameters EMM state, EPS update status, 4G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and eKSI as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] for the case when the EPS attach request procedure is rejected with the EMM cause with the same value.

 If the UE is performing initial registration for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall reset the registration attempt counter, store the SNPN identity in the "permanently forbidden SNPNs" list for onboarding services, enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH, and perform an SNPN selection or an SNPN selection for onboarding services according to 3GPPTS23.122[5]. If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS, the UE shall set the SNPN-specific attempt counter for the current SNPN to the UE implementation-specific maximum value.

 If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS and the UE also supports the registration procedure over the other access, the UE shall in addition handle 5GMM parameters and 5GMM state for this access, as described for this 5GMM cause value.

#11 (PLMN not allowed).

 This cause value received from a cell belonging to an SNPN is considered as an abnormal case and the behaviour of the UE is specified in subclause5.5.1.2.7.

 The UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2) and shall delete any 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and ngKSI. The UE shall delete the list of equivalent PLMNs and reset the registration attempt counter and store the PLMN identity in the forbidden PLMN list as specified in subclause5.3.13A and if the UE is configured to use timer T3245 then the UE shall start timer T3245 and proceed as described in clause 5.3.19a.1. For 3GPP access the UE shall enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH and perform a PLMN selection according to 3GPPTS23.122[5], and for non-3GPP access the UE shall enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE and perform network selection as defined in 3GPPTS24.502[18]. If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS and the UE maintains the PLMN-specific attempt counter and the PLMN-specific attempt counter for non-3GPP access for that PLMN, the UE shall set the PLMN-specific attempt counter and the PLMN-specific attempt counter for non-3GPP access for that PLMN to the UE implementation-specific maximum value.

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall in addition handle the EMM parameters EMM state, EPS update status, 4G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list, eKSI and attach attempt counter as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] for the case when the EPS attach request procedure is rejected with the EMM cause with the same value.

 If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS and the UE also supports the registration procedure over the other access to the same PLMN, the UE shall in addition handle 5GMM parameters and 5GMM state for this access, as described for this 5GMM cause value.

#12 (Tracking area not allowed).

 The UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2) and shall delete 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and ngKSI. Additionally, the UE shall reset the registration attempt counter.

 If:

1) the UE is not operating in SNPN access operation mode, the UE shall store the current TAI in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service" and enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE. If the REGISTRATION REJECT message is not integrity protected, the UE shall memorize the current TAI was stored in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service" for non-integrity protected NAS reject message; or

2) the UE is operating in SNPN access operation mode, the UE shall store the current TAI in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service" for the current SNPN and, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription, and enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE. If the REGISTRATION REJECT is not integrity protected, the UE shall memorize the current TAI was stored in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service" for the current SNPN and, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription, for non-integrity protected NAS reject message.

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall handle the EMM parameters EMM state, EPS update status, 4G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list, eKSI and attach attempt counter as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] for the case when the EPS attach request procedure is rejected with the EMM cause with the same value.

#13 (Roaming not allowed in this tracking area).

 The UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2) and shall delete 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and ngKSI. Additionally, the UE shall delete the list of equivalent PLMNs (if available) and reset the registration attempt counter.

 If:

1) the UE is not operating in SNPN access operation mode, the UE shall store the current TAI in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" and enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE or optionally 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH. If the REGISTRATION REJECT message is not integrity protected, the UE shall memorize the current TAI was stored in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" for non-integrity protected NAS reject message; or

2) the UE is operating in SNPN access operation mode, the UE shall store the current TAI in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" for the current SNPN and, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription, and enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE or optionally 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH. If the REGISTRATION REJECT message is not integrity protected, the UE shall memorize the current TAI was stored in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" for the current SNPN and, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription, for non-integrity protected NAS reject message.

 For 3GPP access, if the UE is registered in S1 mode and operating in dual-registration mode, the PLMN that the UE chooses to register in is specified in subclause4.8.3. Otherwise the UE shall perform a PLMN selection or SNPN selection according to 3GPPTS23.122[5].

 For non-3GPP access, the UE shall perform network selection as defined in 3GPPTS24.502[18].

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall handle the EMM parameters EMM state, EPS update status, 4G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list, eKSI and attach attempt counter as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] for the case when the EPS attach request procedure is rejected with the EMM cause with the same value.

#15 (No suitable cells in tracking area).

 The UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2) and shall delete any 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and ngKSI. Additionally, the UE shall reset the registration attempt counter.

 If:

1) the UE is not operating in SNPN access operation mode, the UE shall store the current TAI in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" and enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE. If the REGISTRATION REJECT message is not integrity protected, the UE shall memorize the current TAI was stored in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" for non-integrity protected NAS reject message; or

2) the UE is operating in SNPN access operation mode, the UE shall store the current TAI in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" for the current SNPN and, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription, and enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE. If the REGISTRATION REJECT message is not integrity protected, the UE shall memorize the current TAI was stored in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" for the current SNPN and, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription, for non-integrity protected NAS reject message.

 The UE shall search for a suitable cell in another tracking area according to 3GPPTS38.304[28] or 3GPPTS36.304[25C].

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall handle the EMM parameters EMM state, EPS update status, 4G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list, eKSI and attach attempt counter as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] for the case when the EPS attach request procedure is rejected with the EMM cause with the same value.

 If received over non-3GPP access the cause shall be considered as an abnormal case and the behaviour of the UE for this case is specified in subclause5.5.1.2.7.

#22 (Congestion).

 If the T3346 value IE is present in the REGISTRATION REJECT message and the value indicates that this timer is neither zero nor deactivated, the UE shall proceed as described below; otherwise it shall be considered as an abnormal case and the behaviour of the UE for this case is specified in subclause5.5.1.2.7.

 The UE shall abort the initial registration procedure, set the 5GS update status to 5U2 NOT UPDATED, reset the registration attempt counter and enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-REGISTRATION.

 The UE shall stop timer T3346 if it is running.

 If the REGISTRATION REJECT message is integrity protected, the UE shall start timer T3346 with the value provided in the T3346 value IE.

 If the REGISTRATION REJECT message is not integrity protected, the UE shall start timer T3346 with a random value from the default range specified in 3GPPTS24.008[12].

 The UE stays in the current serving cell and applies the normal cell reselection process. The initial registration procedure is started if still needed when timer T3346 expires or is stopped.

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall handle the EMM parameters EMM state, EPS update status, and attach attempt counter as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] for the case when the EPS attach request procedure is rejected with the EMM cause with the same value.

 If the UE is registering for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE may enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH and perform an SNPN selection or an SNPN selection for onboarding services according to 3GPPTS23.122[5].

#27 (N1 mode not allowed).

 The UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2) and shall delete any 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and ngKSI. Additionally, the UE shall reset the registration attempt counter and shall enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE. If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS, the UE shall set:

1) the PLMN-specific N1 mode attempt counter for 3GPP access and the PLMN-specific N1 mode attempt counter for non-3GPP access for that PLMN in case of PLMN; or

2) the SNPN-specific attempt counter for 3GPP access for the current SNPN in case of SNPN and the SNPN-specific attempt counter for non-3GPP access for the current SNPN;

 to the UE implementation-specific maximum value.

 The UE shall disable the N1 mode capability for the specific access type for which the message was received (see subclause4.9).

 If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS, the UE shall disable the N1 mode capability also for the other access type (see subclause4.9).

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall in addition set the EPS update status to EU3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED and shall delete any 4G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and eKSI. Additionally, the UE shall reset the attach attempt counter and enter the state EMM-DEREGISTERED.

#31 (Redirection to EPC required).

 5GMM cause #31 received by a UE that has not indicated support for CIoT optimizations or not indicated support for S1 mode or received by a UE over non-3GPP access is considered as an abnormal case and the behaviour of the UE is specified in subclause5.5.1.2.7.

 This cause value received from a cell belonging to an SNPN is considered as an abnormal case and the behaviour of the UE is specified in subclause5.5.1.2.7.

 The UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2) and shall delete any 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and ngKSI. Additionally, the UE shall reset the registration attempt counter.

 The UE shall enable the E-UTRA capability if it was disabled, disable the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access (see subclause4.9.2) and enter the 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.NO-CELL-AVAILABLE.

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall handle the EMM parameters EMM state, EPS update status, 4G-GUTI, TAI list, eKSI and attach attempt counter as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] for the case when the EPS attach procedure is rejected with the EMM cause with the same value.

#62 (No network slices available).

 The UE shall abort the initial registration procedure, set the 5GS update status to 5U2 NOT UPDATED and enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED. ATTEMPTING-REGISTRATION or 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH. Additionally, the UE shall reset the registration attempt counter.

 The UE receiving the rejected NSSAI in the REGISTRATION REJECT message takes the following actions based on the rejection cause in the rejected S-NSSAI(s):

 "S-NSSAI not available in the current PLMN or SNPN"

 The UE shall store the rejected S-NSSAI(s) in the rejected NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN as specified in subclause4.6.2.2 and shall not attempt to use this S-NSSAI(s) in the current PLMN or SNPN until switching off the UE, the UICC containing the USIM is removed, an entry of the "list of subscriber data" with the SNPN identity of the current SNPN is updated, or the rejected S-NSSAI(s) are removed or deleted as described in subclause4.6.2.2.

 "S-NSSAI not available in the current registration area"

 The UE shall store the rejected S-NSSAI(s) in the rejected NSSAI for the current registration area as described in subclause4.6.2.2 and shall not attempt to use this S-NSSAI(s) in the current registration area until switching off the UE, the UE moving out of the current registration area, the UICC containing the USIM is removed, the entry of the "list of subscriber data" with the SNPN identity of the current SNPN is updated, or the rejected S-NSSAI(s) are removed or deleted as described in subclause4.6.2.2.

 "S-NSSAI not available due to the failed or revoked network slice-specific authentication and authorization"

 The UE shall store the rejected S-NSSAI(s) in the rejected NSSAI for the failed or revoked NSSAA as specified in subclause4.6.2.2 and shall not attempt to use this S-NSSAI in the current PLMN or SNPN over any access until switching off the UE, the UICC containing the USIM is removed, the entry of the "list of subscriber data" with the SNPN identity of the current SNPN is updated, or the rejected S-NSSAI(s) are removed or deleted as described in subclause4.6.1 and 4.6.2.2.

 "S-NSSAI not available due to maximum number of UEs reached"

 Unless the back-off timer value received along with the S-NSSAI is zero, the UE shall add the rejected S-NSSAI(s) in the rejected NSSAI for the maximum number of UEs reached as specified in subclause4.6.2.2 and shall not attempt to use this S-NSSAI in the current PLMN or SNPN over the current access until switching off the UE, the UICC containing the USIM is removed, the entry of the "list of subscriber data" with the SNPN identity of the current SNPN is updated, or the rejected S-NSSAI(s) are removed as described in subclause4.6.2.2.

NOTE6: If the back-off timer value received along with the S-NSSAI in the rejected NSSAI for the maximum number of UEs reached is zero as specified in subclause10.5.7.4a of TS24.008, the UE does not consider the S-NSSAI as the rejected S-NSSAI.

 If there is one or more S-NSSAIs in the rejected NSSAI with the rejection cause "S-NSSAI not available due to maximum number of UEs reached", then for each S-NSSAI, the UE shall behave as follows:

a) stop the timer T3526 associated with the S-NSSAI, if running;

b) start the timer T3526 with:

1) the back-off timer value received along with the S-NSSAI, if a back-off timer value is received along with the S-NSSAI that is neither zero nor deactivated; or

2) an implementation specific back-off timer value, if no back-off timer value is received along with the S-NSSAI; and

c) remove the S-NSSAI from the rejected NSSAI for the maximum number of UEs reached when the timer T3526 associated with the S-NSSAI expires.

 If the UE has an allowed NSSAI or configured NSSAI that contains S-NSSAI(s) which are not included in the rejected NSSAI the UE may stay in the current serving cell, apply the normal cell reselection process and start an initial registration with a requested NSSAI that includes any S-NSSAI from the allowed NSSAI or the configured NSSAI that is not in the rejected NSSAI. Otherwise the UE may perform a PLMN selection or SNPN selection according to 3GPPTS23.122[5] and additionally, the UE may disable the N1 mode capability for the current PLMN or SNPN if the UE does not have an allowed NSSAI and each S-NSSAI in configured NSSAI, if available, was rejected with cause "S-NSSAI not available in the current PLMN or SNPN" or "S-NSSAI not available due to the failed or revoked network slice-specific authentication and authorization" as described in subclause4.9.

 If the UE has neither allowed NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN nor configured NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN and,

1) if at least one S-NSSAI in the default configured NSSAI is not rejected, the UE may stay in the current serving cell, apply the normal cell reselection process, and start an initial registration with a requested NSSAI with that default configured NSSAI; or

2) if all the S-NSSAI(s) in the default configured NSSAI are rejected and at least one S-NSSAI is rejected due to "S-NSSAI not available in the current registration area",

i) if the REGISTRATION REJECT message is integrity protected and the UE is not operating in SNPN access operation mode, the UE shall store the current TAI in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" and enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE; or

ii) if the REGISTRATION REJECT message is integrity protected and the UE is operating in SNPN access operation mode, the UE shall store the current TAI in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" for the current SNPN and enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE.

 Otherwise, the UE may perform a PLMN selection or SNPN selection according to 3GPPTS23.122[5] and additionally, the UE may disable the N1 mode capability for the current PLMN or SNPN if each S-NSSAI in the default configured NSSAI was rejected with cause "S-NSSAI not available in the current PLMN or SNPN" or "S-NSSAI not available due to the failed or revoked network slice-specific authentication and authorization" as described in subclause4.9.

 If the UE has neither allowed NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN nor configured NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN and has rejected NSSAI for the reached maximum number of UEs, and the UE wants to obtain services in the current serving cell without performing a PLMN selection or SNPN selection, the UE may stay in the current serving cell and attempt to use the rejected S-NSSAI(s) for the maximum number of UEs reached in the current serving cell after the rejected S-NSSAI(s) are removed as described in subclause4.6.2.2.

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall in addition set the EPS update status to EU2 NOT UPDATED, reset the attach attempt counter and enter the state EMM-DEREGISTERED.

#72 (Non-3GPP access to 5GCN not allowed).

 When received over non-3GPP access the UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2) and shall delete 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and ngKSI. Additionally, the UE shall reset the registration attempt counter and enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED. If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS, the UE shall set:

1) the PLMN-specific N1 mode attempt counter for non-3GPP access for that PLMN in case of PLMN: or

2) the SNPN-specific attempt counter for non-3GPP access for that SNPN in case of SNPN;

 to the UE implementation-specific maximum value.

NOTE7: The 5GMM sublayer states, the 5GMM parameters and the registration status are managed per access type independently, i.e. 3GPP access or non-3GPP access (see subclauses4.7.2 and 5.1.3).

 The UE shall disable the N1 mode capability for non-3GPP access (see subclause4.9.3).

 As an implementation option, the UE may enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH in order to perform a PLMN selection according to 3GPPTS23.122[5].

 If received over 3GPP access the cause shall be considered as an abnormal case and the behaviour of the UE for this case is specified in subclause5.5.1.2.7.

#73 (Serving network not authorized).

 This cause value received from a cell belonging to an SNPN is considered as an abnormal case and the behaviour of the UE is specified in subclause5.5.1.2.7.

 The UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause 5.1.3.2.2) and shall delete any 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and ngKSI. The UE shall delete the list of equivalent PLMNs, reset the registration attempt counter, store the PLMN identity in the forbidden PLMN list as specified in subclause5.3.13A. For 3GPP access the UE shall enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH in order to perform a PLMN selection according to 3GPPTS23.122[5], and for non-3GPP access the UE shall enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE and perform network selection as defined in 3GPPTS24.502[18]. If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS, the UE shall set the PLMN-specific attempt counter and the PLMN-specific attempt counter for non-3GPP access for that PLMN to the UE implementation-specific maximum value.

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall in addition set the EPS update status to EU3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED and shall delete any 4G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and eKSI. Additionally, the UE shall reset the attach attempt counter and enter the state EMM-DEREGISTERED.

#74 (Temporarily not authorized for this SNPN).

 5GMM cause #74 is only applicable when received from a cell belonging to an SNPN. 5GMM cause #74 received from a cell not belonging to an SNPN is considered as an abnormal case and the behaviour of the UE is specified in subclause5.5.1.2.7.

 The UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2) and shall delete any 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and ngKSI. The UE shall reset the registration attempt counter and store the SNPN identity in the "temporarily forbidden SNPNs" list for the specific access type for which the message was received and, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription. If the registration request is not for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH and perform an SNPN selection according to 3GPPTS23.122[5]. If the registration request is for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH and perform an SNPN selection or an SNPN selection for onboarding services according to 3GPPTS23.122[5]. If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS, the UE shall set the SNPN-specific attempt counter for 3GPP access and the SNPN-specific attempt counter for non-3GPP access for the current SNPN to the UE implementation-specific maximum value.

 If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS and the UE also supports the registration procedure over the other access to the same SNPN, the UE shall in addition handle 5GMM parameters and 5GMM state for this access, as described for this 5GMM cause value.

NOTE8: When 5GMM cause #74 is received over 3GPP access, the term "other access" in "the UE also supports the registration procedure over the other access to the same SNPN" is used to express access to SNPN services via a PLMN.

NOTE9: The term "non-3GPP access" in an SNPN refers to the case where the UE is accessing SNPN services via a PLMN.

#75 (Permanently not authorized for this SNPN).

 5GMM cause #75 is only applicable when received from a cell belonging to an SNPN with a globally-unique SNPN identity. 5GMM cause #75 received from a cell not belonging to an SNPN or a cell belonging to an SNPN with a non-globally-unique SNPN identity is considered as an abnormal case and the behaviour of the UE is specified in subclause5.5.1.2.7.

 The UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2) and shall delete any 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and ngKSI. The UE shall reset the registration attempt counter and store the SNPN identity in the "permanently forbidden SNPNs" list for the specific access type for which the message was received and, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription. If the registration request is not for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH and perform an SNPN selection according to 3GPPTS23.122[5]. If the registration request is for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH and perform an SNPN selection or an SNPN selection for onboarding services according to 3GPPTS23.122[5]. If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS, the UE shall set the SNPN-specific attempt counter for 3GPP access and the SNPN-specific attempt counter for non-3GPP access for the current SNPN to the UE implementation-specific maximum value.

 If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS and the UE also supports the registration procedure over the other access to the same SNPN, the UE shall in addition handle 5GMM parameters and 5GMM state for this access, as described for this 5GMM cause value.

NOTE10: When 5GMM cause #75 is received over 3GPP access, the term "other access" in "the UE also supports the registration procedure over the other access to the same SNPN" is used to express access to SNPN services via a PLMN.

NOTE11: The term "non-3GPP access" in an SNPN refers to the case where the UE is accessing SNPN services via a PLMN.

#76 (Not authorized for this CAG or authorized for CAG cells only).

 This cause value received via non-3GPP access or from a cell belonging to an SNPN is considered as an abnormal case and the behaviour of the UE is specified in subclause5.5.1.2.7.

 The UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED, store the 5GS update status according to clause5.1.3.2.2, and reset the registration attempt counter.

 If 5GMM cause #76 is received from:

1) a CAG cell, and if the UE receives a "CAG information list" in the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE included in the REGISTRATION REJECT message, the UE shall:

i) replace the "CAG information list" stored in the UE with the received CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE when received in the HPLMN or EHPLMN;

ii) replace the serving VPLMN's entry of the "CAG information list" stored in the UE with the serving VPLMN's entry of the received CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE when the UE receives the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE in a serving PLMN other than the HPLMN or EHPLMN; or

NOTE12: When the UE receives the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE in a serving PLMN other than the HPLMN or EHPLMN, entries of a PLMN other than the serving VPLMN, if any, in the received CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE are ignored.

iii) remove the serving VPLMN's entry of the "CAG information list" stored in the UE when the UE receives the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE in a serving PLMN other than the HPLMN or EHPLMN and the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE does not contain the serving VPLMN's entry.

 Otherwise, then the UE shall delete the CAG-ID(s) of the cell from the "allowed CAG list" for the current PLMN. In the case the "allowed CAG list" for the current PLMN only contains a range of CAG-IDs, how the UE deletes the CAG-ID(s) of the cell from the "allowed CAG list" for the current PLMN is up to UE implementation. In addition:

i) if the entry in the "CAG information list" for the current PLMN does not include an "indication that the UE is only allowed to access 5GS via CAG cells" or if the entry in the "CAG information list" for the current PLMN includes an "indication that the UE is only allowed to access 5GS via CAG cells" and the updated "allowed CAG list" for the current PLMN includes one or more CAG-IDs, then the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE and shall search for a suitable cell according to 3GPPTS38.304[28] or 3GPPTS36.304[25C] with the updated "CAG information list";

ii) if the entry in the "CAG information list" for the current PLMN includes an "indication that the UE is only allowed to access 5GS via CAG cells" and the updated "allowed CAG list" for the current PLMN does not include any CAG-ID, then the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH and shall apply the PLMN selection process defined in 3GPP TS 23.122 [5] with the updated "CAG information list"; or

iii) if the "CAG information list" does not include an entry for the current PLMN, then the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE and shall search for a suitable cell according to 3GPPTS38.304[28] or 3GPPTS36.304[25C] with the updated "CAG information list".

2) a non-CAG cell, and if the UE receives a "CAG information list" in the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE included in the REGISTRATION REJECT message, the UE shall:

i) replace the "CAG information list" stored in the UE with the received CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE when received in the HPLMN or EHPLMN;

ii) replace the serving VPLMN's entry of the "CAG information list" stored in the UE with the serving VPLMN's entry of the received CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE when the UE receives the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE in a serving PLMN other than the HPLMN or EHPLMN; or

NOTE13: When the UE receives the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE in a serving PLMN other than the HPLMN or EHPLMN, entries of a PLMN other than the serving VPLMN, if any, in the received CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE are ignored.

iii) remove the serving VPLMN's entry of the "CAG information list" stored in the UE when the UE receives the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE in a serving PLMN other than the HPLMN or EHPLMN and the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE does not contain the serving VPLMN's entry.

 Otherwise, the UE shall store an "indication that the UE is only allowed to access 5GS via CAG cells" in the entry of the "CAG information list" for the current PLMN, if any. If the "CAG information list" stored in the UE does not include the current PLMN's entry, the UE shall add an entry for the current PLMN to the "CAG information list" and store an "indication that the UE is only allowed to access 5GS via CAG cells" in the entry of the "CAG information list" for the current PLMN. If the UE does not have a stored "CAG information list", the UE shall create a new "CAG information list" and add an entry with an "indication that the UE is only allowed to access 5GS via CAG cells" for the current PLMN.

In addition:

i) if the "allowed CAG list" for the current PLMN includes one or more CAG-IDs, then the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE and shall search for a suitable cell according to 3GPPTS38.304[28] with the updated CAG information; or

ii) if the "allowed CAG list" for the current PLMN does not include any CAG-ID, then the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH and shall apply the PLMN selection process defined in 3GPP TS 23.122 [5] with the updated "CAG information list".

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall in addition set the EPS update status to EU3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED, reset the attach attempt counter and enter the state EMM-DEREGISTERED.

#77 (Wireline access area not allowed).

 5GMM cause #77 is only applicable when received from a wireline access network by the 5G-RG or the W-AGF acting on behalf of the FN-CRG. 5GMM cause #77 received from a 5G access network other than a wireline access network and 5GMM cause #77 received by the W-AGF acting on behalf of the FN-BRG are considered as abnormal cases and the behaviour of the UE is specified in subclause5.5.1.2.7.

 When received over wireline access network, the 5G-RG and the W-AGF acting on behalf of the FN-CRG shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2), shall delete 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and ngKSI, shall reset the registration attempt counter, shall enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED and shall act as specified in subclause5.3.23.

NOTE14: The 5GMM sublayer states, the 5GMM parameters and the registration status are managed per access type independently, i.e. 3GPP access or non-3GPP access (see subclauses4.7.2 and 5.1.3).

#78 (PLMN not allowed to operate at the present UE location).

 This cause value received from a non-satellite NG-RAN cell is considered as an abnormal case and the behaviour of the UE is specified in subclause5.5.1.2.7.

 The UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2) and shall delete 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and ngKSI. Additionally, the UE shall reset the registration attempt counter. The UE shall store the PLMN identity and, if it is known, the current geographical location in the list of "PLMNs not allowed to operate at the present UE location" and shall start a corresponding timer instance (see subclause4.23.2). The UE shall enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH and perform a PLMN selection according to 3GPPTS23.122[5].

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall handle the EMM parameters EMM state, EPS update status, 4G-GUTI, TAI list, eKSI and attach attempt counter as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] for the case when the EPS attach procedure is rejected with the EMM cause with the same value.

#79 (UAS services not allowed).

 The UE shall abort the initial registration procedure, set the 5GS update status to 5U2 NOT UPDATED and enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED. ATTEMPTING-REGISTRATION or 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH. Additionally, the UE shall reset the registration attempt counter. If the UE re-attempt the registration procedure to the current PLMN, the UE shall not include the service-level device ID set to the CAA-level UAV ID in the Service-level-AA container IE of REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall in addition set the EPS update status to EU2 NOT UPDATED, reset the attach attempt counter and enter the state EMM-DEREGISTERED.

#80 (Disaster roaming for the determined PLMN with disaster condition not allowed).

 The UE shall abort the initial registration procedure, set the 5GS update status to 5U2 NOT UPDATED, enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-REGISTRATION and shall delete any 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and ngKSI. Additionally, the UE shall reset the registration attempt counter. The UE shall not attempt to register for disaster roaming on this PLMN for the determined PLMN with disaster condition for a period in the range of 12 to 24 hours. The UE shall not attempt to register for disaster roaming on this PLMN for a period in the range of 3 to 10 minutes. The UE shall perform PLMN selection as described in 3GPPTS23.122[6].

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall in addition set the EPS update status to EU2 NOT UPDATED, reset the attach attempt counter and enter the state EMM-DEREGISTERED.

Other values are considered as abnormal cases. The behaviour of the UE in those cases is specified in subclause5.5.1.2.7.

5.5.1.2.6 Initial registration for emergency services not accepted by the network

Upon receiving the REGISTRATION REJECT message including 5GMM cause #5 "PEI not accepted", the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.NO-SUPI. If the REGISTRATION REJECT message is received,

- over 3GPP access; or

- over non-3GPP access and is integrity protected;

and the UE also supports the registration procedure over the other access, the UE shall in addition handle 5GMM parameters and 5GMM state for this access, as described for this 5GMM cause value.

Upon receiving the REGISTRATION REJECT message including 5GMM cause value which is not #5 "PEI not accepted", the UE shall perform the actions as described in subclause5.5.1.2.5 with the following addition: the UE shall inform the upper layers of the failure of the procedure.

NOTE1: This can result in the upper layers requesting implementation specific mechanisms, e.g. procedures specified in 3GPPTS24.229[14] can result in the emergency call being attempted to another IP-CAN.

If the initial registration request for emergency services fails due to abnormal cases, the UE shall perform the actions as described in subclause5.5.1.2.7 and inform the upper layers of the failure to access the network or the failure of the procedure.

NOTE2: This can result in the upper layers requesting other implementation specific mechanisms, e.g. procedures specified in 3GPPTS24.229[14] can result in the emergency call being attempted to another IP-CAN.

In a shared network, upon receiving the REGISTRATION REJECT message, the UE shall perform the actions as described in subclause5.5.1.2.5, and shall:

a) inform the upper layers of the failure of the procedure; or

NOTE3: The upper layers can request implementation specific mechanisms, e.g. procedures specified in 3GPPTS24.229[14] that can result in the emergency call being attempted to another IP-CAN.

b) attempt to perform a PLMN selection in the shared network and, if an initial registration for emergency services was not already attempted with the selected PLMN and the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, for which the REGISTRATION REJECT message was received, is:

- not for sending a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message with request type set to "existing emergency PDU session", initiate an initial registration for emergency services with the selected PLMN; or

- for sending a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message with request type set to "existing emergency PDU session", and:

i) the selected PLMN is an equivalent PLMN, initiate an initial registration for emergency services with the selected PLMN; and

ii) the selected PLMN is not an equivalent PLMN, perform a PLMN selection and initiate an initial registration for emergency services with the selected PLMN if an initial registration for emergency services was not already attempted with the selected PLMN.

In a shared network, if the initial registration request for emergency services fails due to abnormal cases, the UE shall perform the actions as described in subclause5.5.1.2.7 and shall:

a) inform the upper layers of the failure of the procedure; or

NOTE4: The upper layers can request implementation specific mechanisms, e.g. procedures specified in 3GPPTS24.229[14] that can result in the emergency call being attempted to another IP-CAN.

b) attempt to perform a PLMN selection in the shared network and, if an initial registration for emergency services was not already attempted with the selected PLMN and the REGISTRATION REQUEST message is:

- not for sending a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message with request type set to "existing emergency PDU session", initiate an initial registration for emergency services with the selected PLMN; or

- for sending a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message with request type set to "existing emergency PDU session", and:

i) the selected PLMN is an equivalent PLMN, initiate an initial registration for emergency services with the selected PLMN; and

ii) the selected PLMN is not an equivalent PLMN, perform a PLMN selection and initiate an initial registration for emergency services with the selected PLMN if an initial registration for emergency services was not already attempted with the selected PLMN.

5.5.1.2.6A Initial registration for initiating an emergency PDU session not accepted by the network

If the network cannot accept an initial registration request with 5GS registration type IE set to "initial registration" and for sending a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message with request type set to "initial emergency request", the UE shall perform the procedures as described in subclause5.5.1.2.5. Then if the UE is in the same selected PLMN where the last initial registration request was attempted, the UE shall:

a) inform the upper layers of the failure of the procedure; or

NOTE1: This can result in the upper layers requesting implementation specific mechanisms, e.g. procedures specified in 3GPPTS24.229[14] can result in the emergency call being attempted to another IP-CAN.

b) attempt initial registration for emergency services.

If the network cannot accept an initial registration request with 5GS registration type IE set to "initial registration", for establishing an emergency PDU session and the PDU session needs to be established due to handover of an existing PDN connection for emergency bearer services, the UE shall perform the procedures as described in subclause5.5.1.2.5. Then if the UE is in the same selected PLMN or equivalent PLMN where the last initial registration request was attempted, the UE shall attempt initial registration for emergency services.

If the initial registration request, with 5GS registration type IE set to "initial registration" and for initiating an emergency PDU session, fails due to abnormal case b) in subclause5.5.1.2.7, the UE shall perform the actions as described in subclause5.5.1.2.7 and inform the upper layers of the failure to access the network.

NOTE2: This can result in the upper layers requesting implementation specific mechanisms, e.g. procedures specified in 3GPPTS24.229[14] can result in the emergency call being attempted to another IP-CAN.

If the initial registration request, with 5GS registration type IE set to "initial registration" and for initiating an emergency PDU session, fails due to abnormal cases c), d) or e) in subclause5.5.1.2.7, the UE shall perform the actions as described in subclause5.5.1.2.7. Then if the UE is in:

a) the same selected PLMN where the last initial registration request was attempted and the PDU session does not need to be established due to handover of an existing PDN connection for emergency bearer services, the UE shall:

- inform the upper layers of the failure of the procedure; or

NOTE3: This can result in the upper layers requesting implementation specific mechanisms, e.g. procedures specified in 3GPPTS24.229[14] can result in the emergency call being attempted to another IP-CAN.

- attempt initial registration for emergency services; or

b) the same selected PLMN or equivalent PLMN where the last initial registration request was attempted and the PDU session needs to be established due to handover of an existing PDN connection for emergency bearer services, attempt initial registration for emergency services.

5.5.1.2.7 Abnormal cases in the UE

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a) Timer T3346 is running.

 The UE shall not start the registration procedure for initial registration unless:

1) the UE is a UE configured for high priority access in selected PLMN;

2) the UE needs to perform the registration procedure for initial registration for emergency services;

3) the UE receives a DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message with the "re-registration required" indication;

4) the UE in NB-N1 mode is requested by the upper layer to transmit user data related to an exceptional event and:

- the UE is allowed to use exception data reporting (see the ExceptionDataReportingAllowed leaf of the NAS configuration MO in 3GPPTS24.368[17] or the USIM file EFNASCONFIG in 3GPPTS31.102[22]); and

- timer T3346 was not started when N1 NAS signalling connection was established with RRC establishment cause set to "mo-ExceptionData"; or

5) the UE needs to perform the registration procedure with 5GS registration type IE set to "initial registration" for initiating of an emergency PDU session, upon request of the upper layers to establish the emergency PDU session.

 The UE stays in the current serving cell and applies the normal cell reselection process.

NOTE1: It is considered an abnormal case if the UE needs to initiate a registration procedure for initial registration while timer T3346 is running independent on whether timer T3346 was started due to an abnormal case or a non-successful case.

b) The lower layers indicate that the access attempt is barred.

 The UE shall not start the initial registration procedure. The UE stays in the current serving cell and applies the normal cell reselection process. Receipt of the access barred indication shall not trigger the selection of a different core network type (EPC or 5GCN).

 The initial registration procedure is started, if still needed, when the lower layers indicate that the barring is alleviated for the access category with which the access attempt was associated.

ba) The lower layers indicate that:

1) access barring is applicable for all access categories except categories 0 and 2 and the access category with which the access attempt was associated is other than 0 and 2; or

2) access barring is applicable for all access categories except category 0 and the access category with which the access attempt was associated is other than 0.

 If the REGISTRATION REQUEST message has not been sent, the UE shall proceed as specified for case b. If the REGISTRATION REQUEST message has been sent, the UE shall proceed as specified for case e and, additionally, the registration procedure for initial registration is started, if still needed, when the lower layers indicate that the barring is alleviated for the access category with which the access attempt was associated.

c) T3510 timeout.

 The UE shall abort the registration procedure for initial registration and the NAS signalling connection, if any, shall be released locally if the initial registration request is neither for emergency services nor for initiating a PDU session for emergency services with request type set to "existing emergency PDU session". The UE shall proceed as described below.

d) REGISTRATION REJECT message, other 5GMM cause values than those treated in subclause5.5.1.2.5, and cases of 5GMM cause values #11, #15, #22, #31, #72, #73, #74, #75, #76, #77 and #78, if considered as abnormal cases according to subclause5.5.1.2.5.

 If the registration request is neither an initial registration request for emergency services nor an initial registration request for initiating a PDU session for emergency services with request type set to "existing emergency PDU session", upon reception of the 5GMM causes #95, #96, #97, #99 and #111 the UE should set the registration attempt counter to 5.

 The UE shall proceed as described below.

e) Lower layer failure or release of the NAS signalling connection received from lower layers before the REGISTRATION ACCEPT or REGISTRATION REJECT message is received.

 The UE shall abort the registration procedure for initial registration and proceed as described below.

f) UE initiated de-registration required.

 The registration procedure for initial registration shall be aborted, and the UE initiated de-registration procedure shall be performed.

g) De-registration procedure collision.

 If the UE receives a DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message from the network in state 5GMM-REGISTERED-INITIATED the de-registration procedure shall be aborted and the initial registration procedure shall be progressed.

NOTE2: The above collision case is valid if the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message indicates the access type over which the initial registration procedure is attempted otherwise both the procedures are progressed.

h) Change in the current TAI.

 If the current TAI is changed before the registration procedure for initial registration is completed, the registration procedure for initial registration shall be aborted and re-initiated immediately.

 If the REGISTRATION COMPLETE message needs to be sent and a tracking area border is crossed when the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message has been received but before a REGISTRATION COMPLETE message is sent and:

1) if the current TAI is in the TAI list, the UE sends the REGISTRATION COMPLETE message to the network; and

2) otherwise, the registration procedure for initial registration shall be aborted and the registration procedure for mobility registration update shall be initiated.

 If a 5G-GUTI was allocated during the registration procedure, this 5G-GUTI shall be used in the registration procedure.

i) Transmission failure of REGISTRATION COMPLETE message indication with change in the current TAI.

1) If the current TAI is still part of the TAI list, the UE resends the REGISTRATION COMPLETE message to the network; and

2) otherwise, the registration procedure for initial registration shall be aborted and the registration procedure for mobility registration update shall be initiated.

j) Transmission failure of REGISTRATION COMPLETE message indication without change in the current TAI from lower layers.

 It is up to the UE implementation how to re-run the ongoing procedure.

k) Transmission failure of REGISTRATION REQUEST message indication from the lower layers.

 The registration procedure for initial registration shall be aborted and re-initiated immediately.

l) Timer T3447 is running.

 The UE shall not start the registration procedure for initial registration with Follow-on request indicator set to "Follow-on request pending" unless:

1) the UE is a UE configured for high priority access in selected PLMN; or

2) the UE needs to perform the registration procedure for initial registration for emergency services.

 The UE stays in the current serving cell and applies the normal cell reselection process. The registration procedure for initial registration is started, if still necessary, when timer T3447 expires or timer T3447 is stopped.

For the cases c, d and e, the UE shall proceed as follows:

 Timer T3510 shall be stopped if still running.

 If the registration procedure is neither an initial registration for emergency services nor for establishing an emergency PDU session with registration type not set to "emergency registration", the registration attempt counter shall be incremented, unless it was already set to 5.

 If the registration attempt counter is less than 5:

- if the initial registration request is not for emergency services, timer T3511 is started and the state is changed to 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-REGISTRATION. When timer T3511 expires the registration procedure for initial registration shall be restarted, if still required.

 If the registration attempt counter is equal to 5

- the UE shall delete 5G-GUTI, TAI list, last visited registered TAI, list of equivalent PLMNs (if any), and ngKSI, start timer T3502 and shall set the 5GS update status to 5U2 NOT UPDATED. The state is changed to 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-REGISTRATION or optionally to 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH in order to perform a PLMN selection, SNPN selection according to 3GPPTS23.122[5].

- if the procedure is performed via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode:

- the UE shall in addition handle the EMM parameters EPS update status, EMM state, 4G-GUTI, TAI list, last visited registered TAI, list of equivalent PLMNs and eKSI as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] for the abnormal cases when an EPS attach procedure fails and the attach attempt counter is equal to 5; and

- the UE shall attempt to select E-UTRAN radio access technology and proceed with appropriate EMM specific procedures. Additionally, The UE may disable the N1 mode capability as specified in subclause4.9.

5.5.1.2.8 Abnormal cases on the network side

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a) Lower layer failure

 If a lower layer failure occurs before the REGISTRATION COMPLETE message has been received from the UE and timer T3550 is running, the AMF shall locally abort the registration procedure for initial registration, enter state 5GMM-REGISTERED and shall not resend the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. If a new 5G-GUTI was assigned to the UE in the registration procedure for initial registration, the AMF shall consider both the old and the new 5G-GUTI as valid until the old 5G-GUTI can be considered as invalid by the AMF or the 5GMM context which has been marked as deregistered in the AMF is released. If the old 5G-GUTI was allocated by an AMF other than the current AMF, the current AMF does not need to retain the old 5G-GUTI. During this period the network may use the identification procedure followed by a generic UE configuration update procedure if the old 5G-GUTI is used by the UE in a subsequent message.

b) Protocol error

 If the REGISTRATION REQUEST message is received with a protocol error, the AMF shall return a REGISTRATION REJECT message with one of the following 5GMM cause values:

#96 invalid mandatory information;

#99 information element non-existent or not implemented;

#100 conditional IE error; or

#111 protocol error, unspecified.

c) T3550 time-out

 On the first expiry of the timer, the AMF shall retransmit the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message and shall reset and restart timer T3550.

 This retransmission is repeated four times, i.e. on the fifth expiry of timer T3550, the registration procedure for initial registration shall be aborted and the AMF enters state 5GMM-REGISTERED. If a new 5G-GUTI was allocated in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message, the AMF shall consider both the old and the new 5G-GUTIs as valid until the old 5G-GUTI can be considered as invalid by the AMF or the 5GMM context which has been marked as de-registered in the AMF is released. If the old 5G-GUTI was allocated by an AMF other than the current AMF, the current AMF does not need to retain the old 5G-GUTI. During this period, if the old 5G-GUTI is used by the UE in a subsequent message, the AMF acts as specified for casea) above.

d) REGISTRATION REQUEST message received after the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message has been sent and before the REGISTRATION COMPLETE message is received, if the REGISTRATION COMPLETE message is expected.

1) If one or more of the information elements in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message differ from the ones received within the previous REGISTRATION REQUEST message, the previously initiated the registration procedure for initial registration shall be aborted if the REGISTRATION COMPLETE message has not been received and the new registration procedure for initial registration shall be progressed; or

2) if the information elements do not differ, then the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message shall be resent and the timer T3550 shall be restarted. In that case, the retransmission counter related to T3550 is not incremented.

e) More than one REGISTRATION REQUEST message with 5GS registration type IE set to "initial registration" received and no REGISTRATION ACCEPT message or REGISTRATION REJECT message has been sent.

1) If one or more of the information elements in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message with 5GS registration type IE set to "initial registration" differs from the ones received within the previous REGISTRATION REQUEST message with 5GS registration type IE set to "initial registration", the previously initiated the registration procedure for initial registration shall be aborted and the new the registration procedure for initial registration shall be executed;

2) if the information elements do not differ, then the network shall continue with the previous the registration procedure for initial registration and shall ignore the second REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

f) REGISTRATION REQUEST message with 5GS registration type IE set to "initial registration" received in state 5GMM-REGISTERED.

 If a REGISTRATION REQUEST message with 5GS registration type IE set to "initial registration" is received in state 5GMM-REGISTERED the network may initiate the 5GMM common procedures; if it turned out that the REGISTRATION REQUEST message was sent by a genuine UE that has already been registered, the 5GMM context, if any, are deleted and the new REGISTRATION REQUEST is progressed.

NOTE1: The network can determine that the UE is genuine by executing the authentication procedure as described in subclause5.4.1.

g) REGISTRATION REQUEST message with 5GS registration type IE set to "mobility registration updating" or "periodic registration updating" received before REGISTRATION COMPLETE message, if the REGISTRATION COMPLETE message is expected.

 Timer T3550 shall be stopped. The allocated 5G-GUTI in the registration procedure for initial registration shall be considered as valid and the registration procedure for mobility and periodic update shall be progressed as described in subclause5.5.1.3.

h) DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message received before REGISTRATION COMPLETE message, if the REGISTRATION COMPLETE message is expected.

 The AMF shall abort the registration procedure for initial registration and shall progress the de-registration procedure as described in subclause5.5.2.2.

i) UE security capabilities invalid or unacceptable

 If the REGISTRATION REQUEST message is received with invalid or unacceptable UE security capabilities (e.g. no 5GS encryption algorithms (all bits zero), no 5GS integrity algorithms (all bits zero), mandatory 5GS encryption algorithms not supported or mandatory 5GS integrity algorithms not supported, etc.), the AMF shall return a REGISTRATION REJECT message.

NOTE2: 5GMM cause value to be used in REGISTRATION REJECT message is up to the network implementation.

j) Based on operator policy, if the initial registration request from a UE not supporting CAG is rejected due to CAG restrictions, the network shall reject the initial registration with a 5GMM cause value other than the 5GMM cause #76 (Not authorized for this CAG or authorized for CAG cells only).

NOTE3: 5GMM cause #7 (5GS services not allowed), 5GMM cause #11 (PLMN not allowed), 5GMM cause #27 (N1 mode not allowed), 5GMM cause #73 (Serving network not authorized) can be used depending on the subscription of the UE and whether the UE roams or not.

5.5.1.3 Registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update

5.5.1.3.1 General

This procedure is used by a UE for both mobility and periodic registration update of 5GS services. This procedure, when used for periodic registration update of 5GS services, is performed only in 3GPP access.

This procedure used for periodic registration update of 5GS services is controlled in the UE by timer T3512. When timer T3512 expires, the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration area updating is started. Start and reset of timer T3512 is described in subclause10.2.

If the MUSIM UE is registered for emergency services and initiates a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update, the network shall not indicate the support of:

- the NAS signalling connection release;

- the paging indication for voice services;

- the reject paging request; or

- the paging restriction;

in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

5.5.1.3.2 Mobility and periodic registration update initiation

The UE in state 5GMM-REGISTERED shall initiate the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update by sending a REGISTRATION REQUEST message to the AMF,

a) when the UE detects that the current TAI is not in the list of tracking areas that the UE previously registered in the AMF;

b) when the periodic registration updating timer T3512 expires in 5GMM-IDLE mode;

c) when the UE receives a CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message indicating "registration requested" in the Registration requested bit of the Configuration update indication IE as specified in subclauses5.4.4.3;

d) when the UE in state 5GMM-REGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-REGISTRATION-UPDATE either receives a paging or the UE receives a NOTIFICATION message with access type indicating 3GPP access over the non-3GPP access for PDU sessions associated with 3GPP access;

NOTE1: As an implementation option, MUSIM UE is allowed to not respond to paging based on the information available in the paging message, e.g. voice service indication.

e) upon inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode and if the UE previously had initiated an attach procedure or a tracking area updating procedure when in S1 mode;

f) when the UE receives an indication of "RRC Connection failure" from the lower layers and does not have signalling pending (i.e. when the lower layer requests NAS signalling connection recovery) except for the case specified in subclause5.3.1.4;

g) when the UE changes the 5GMM capability or the S1 UE network capability or both;

h) when the UE's usage setting changes;

i) when the UE needs to change the slice(s) it is currently registered to;

j) when the UE changes the UE specific DRX parameters;

k) when the UE in state 5GMM-REGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-REGISTRATION-UPDATE receives a request from the upper layers to establish an emergency PDU session or perform emergency services fallback;

l) when the UE needs to register for SMS over NAS, indicate a change in the requirements to use SMS over NAS, or de-register from SMS over NAS;

m) when the UE needs to indicate PDU session status to the network after performing a local release of PDU session(s) as specified in subclauses6.4.1.5 and 6.4.3.5;

n) when the UE in 5GMM-IDLE mode changes the radio capability for NG-RAN or E-UTRAN;

o) when the UE receives a fallback indication from the lower layers and does not have signalling pending (i.e. when the lower layer requests NAS signalling connection recovery, see subclauses5.3.1.4 and5.3.1.2);

p) void;

q) when the UE needs to request new LADN information;

r) when the UE needs to request the use of MICO mode or needs to stop the use of MICO mode or to request the use of new T3324 value;

s) when the UE in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode with RRC inactive indication enters a cell in the current registration area belonging to an equivalent PLMN of the registered PLMN and not belonging to the registered PLMN;

t) when the UE receives over 3GPP access a SERVICE REJECT message or a DL NAS TRANSPORT message, with the 5GMM cause value set to #28 "Restricted service area";

u) when the UE needs to request the use of eDRX, when a change in the eDRX usage conditions at the UE requires different extended DRX parameters, or needs to stop the use of eDRX;

NOTE2: A change in the eDRX usage conditions at the UE can include e.g. a change in the UE configuration, a change in requirements from upper layers or the battery running low at the UE.

v) when the UE supporting 5G-SRVCC from NG-RAN to UTRAN changes the mobile station classmark 2 or the supported codecs;

w) when the UE in state 5GMM-REGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-REGISTRATION-UPDATE decides to request new network slices after being rejected due to no allowed network slices requested, or request S-NSSAI(s) which have been removed from the rejected NSSAI for the maximum number of UEs reached;

x) when the UE is not in NB-N1 mode and the applicable UE radio capability ID for the current UE radio configuration changes due to a revocation of the network-assigned UE radio capability IDs by the serving PLMN or SNPN;

y) when the UE receives a REGISTRATION REJECT message with 5GMM cause values #3, #6 or #7 without integrity protection over another access;

z) when the UE needs to request new ciphering keys for ciphered broadcast assistance data;

za) when due to manual CAG selection the UE has selected a CAG-ID which is not included in the "allowed CAG list" for the selected PLMN or a CAG-ID in a PLMN for which the entry in the "CAG information list" does not exist or when the UE has selected, without selecting a CAG-ID, a PLMN for which the entry in the "CAG information list" includes an "indication that the UE is only allowed to access 5GS via CAG cells";

zb) when the UE needs to start, stop or change the conditions for using the WUS assistance information or PEIPS assistance information;

zc) when the UE changes the UE specific DRX parameters in NB-N1 mode;

zd) when the UE in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode with RRC inactive indication enters a new cell with different RAT in current TAI list or not in current TAI list;

ze) when the UE enters state 5GMM-REGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE or 5GMM-REGISTERED.NON-ALLOWED-SERVICE (as described in subclause5.3.5.2) over 3GPP access after the UE has sent a NOTIFICATION RESPONSE message over non-3GPP access in response to reception of a NOTIFICATION message over non-3GPP access as specified in subclause5.6.3.1;

zf) when the UE supporting UAS services is not registered for UAS services and needs to register to the 5GS for UAS services;

zg) when the UE supporting MINT needs to perform the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update to register to the PLMN offering disaster roaming;

zh) when the MUSIM UE supporting the paging timing collision control needs to request a new 5G-GUTI assignment and the UE is not registered for emergency services;

NOTE3: Based on implementation, the MUSIM UE can request a new 5G-GUTI assignment (e.g. when the lower layers request to modify the timing of the paging occasions).

zi) when the network supports the paging restriction and the MUSIM UE in state 5GMM-REGISTERED.NON-ALLOWED-SERVICE needs to requests the network to remove the paging restriction; 

zj) when the UE changes the 5GS Preferred CIoT network behaviour or the EPS Preferred CIoT network behaviour;

zk) when the UE that has entered 5GMM-REGISTERED.NO-CELL-AVAILABLE and it has one or more S-NSSAI(s) in pending NSSAI, finds a suitable cell according to 3GPPTS38.304[28]; or

zl) when the UE is registered for disaster roaming services and receives a request from the upper layers to establish an emergency PDU session or perform emergency services fallback..

If case b) is the only reason for initiating the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update, the UE shall indicate "periodic registration updating" in the 5GS registration type IE; otherwise, if the UE initiates the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update due to case Zg), the UE shall indicate "disaster roaming mobility registration updating" in the 5GS registration type IE; otherwise the UE shall indicate "mobility registration updating".

If case zl) is the reason for initiating the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update and if the UE supports S1 mode, the UE shall:

- set the S1 mode bit to "S1 mode supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message; and

- include the S1 UE network capability IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message;

If the UE which is not registered for disaster roaming services indicates "mobility registration updating" in the 5GS registration type IE and the UE supports S1 mode, the UE shall:

- set the S1 mode bit to "S1 mode supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message;

- include the S1 UE network capability IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message; and

- if the UE supports sending an ATTACH REQUEST message containing a PDN CONNECTIVITY REQUEST message with request type set to "handover" to transfer a PDU session from N1 mode to S1 mode, set the HO attach bit to "attach request message containing PDN connectivity request with request type set to handover to transfer PDU session from N1 mode to S1 mode supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If the UE supports the LTE positioning protocol (LPP) in N1 mode as specified in 3GPPTS37.355[26], the UE shall set the LPP bit to "LPP in N1 mode supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If the UE supports the Location Services (LCS) notification mechanisms in N1 mode as specified in 3GPPTS23.273[6B], the UE shall set the 5G-LCS bit to " LCS notification mechanisms supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

For all cases except case b), when the UE is not in NB-N1 mode and the UE supports RACS, the UE shall set the RACS bit to "RACS supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If the UE supports 5G-SRVCC from NG-RAN to UTRAN as specified in 3GPPTS23.216[6A], the UE shall set:

- the 5G-SRVCC from NG-RAN to UTRAN capability bit to "5G-SRVCC from NG-RAN to UTRAN supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message for all cases except caseb; and

- include the Mobile station classmark 2 IE and the Supported codecs IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message for all cases except caseb.

If the UE supports the restriction on use of enhanced coverage, the UE shall set the RestrictEC bit to "Restriction on use of enhanced coverage supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If the UE supports network slice-specific authentication and authorization, the UE shall set the NSSAA bit to "network slice-specific authentication and authorization supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message for all cases except caseb.

If the UE supports CAG feature, the UE shall set the CAG bit to "CAG Supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If the UE supports extended CAG information list, the UE shall set the Ex-CAG bit to "Extended CAG information list supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If the UE operating in the single-registration mode performs inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode and has one or more stored UE policy sections identified by a UPSI with the PLMN ID part indicating the HPLMN or the selected PLMN, the UE shall set the Payload container type IE to "UE policy container" and include the UE STATE INDICATION message (see annexD) in the Payload container IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

NOTE4: In this version of the protocol, the UE can only include the Payload container IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message to carry a payload of type "UE policy container".

The UE in state 5GMM-REGISTERED shall initiate the registration procedure for mobility and periodic update by sending a REGISTRATION REQUEST message to the AMF when the UE needs to request the use of SMS over NAS transport or the current requirements to use SMS over NAS transport change in the UE. The UE shall set the SMS requested bit of the 5GS update type IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message as specified in subclause5.5.1.2.2.

When initiating a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update and the UE needs to send the 5GS update type IE for a reason different than indicating a change in requirement to use SMS over NAS, the UE shall set the SMS requested bit of the 5GS update type IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message to the same value as indicated by the UE in the last REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If the UE no longer requires the use of SMS over NAS, then the UE shall include the 5GS update type IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message with the SMS requested bit set to "SMS over NAS not supported".

After sending the REGISTRATION REQUEST message to the AMF the UE shall start timer T3510. If timer T3502 is currently running, the UE shall stop timer T3502. If timer T3511 is currently running, the UE shall stop timer T3511.

If the last visited registered TAI is available, the UE shall include the last visited registered TAI in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

The UE shall handle the 5GS mobile identity IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message as follows:

a) if the UE is operating in the single-registration mode, performs inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode, and the UE holds a valid native 4G-GUTI, the UE shall create a 5G-GUTI mapped from the valid native 4G-GUTI as specified in 3GPPTS23.003[4] and indicate the mapped 5G-GUTI in the 5GS mobile identity IE. Additionally, if the UE holds a valid 5GGUTI, the UE shall include the 5G-GUTI in the Additional GUTI IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message in the following order:

1) a valid 5G-GUTI that was previously assigned by the same PLMN with which the UE is performing the registration, if available;

2) a valid 5G-GUTI that was previously assigned by an equivalent PLMN, if available; and

3) a valid 5G-GUTI that was previously assigned by any other PLMN, if available; and

NOTE5: The 5G-GUTI included in the Additional GUTI IE is a native 5G-GUTI.

b) for all other cases, if the UE holds a valid 5G-GUTI, the UE shall indicate the 5G-GUTI in the 5GS mobile identity IE. If the UE is registering with an SNPN and the valid 5G-GUTI was previously assigned by another SNPN, the UE shall additionally include the NID of the other SNPN in the NID IE.

 If the UE does not operate in SNPN access operation mode, holds two valid native 5G-GUTIs assigned by PLMNs and:

1) one of the valid native 5G-GUTI was assigned by the PLMN with which the UE is performing the registration, then the UE shall indicate the valid native 5G-GUTI assigned by the PLMN with which the UE is performing the registration. In addition, the UE shall include the other valid native 5G-GUTI in the Additional GUTI IE; or

2) none of the valid native 5G-GUTI was assigned by the PLMN with which the UE is performing the registration, then the UE shall indicate the valid native 5G-GUTI assigned over the same access via which the UE is performing the registration.

If the UE supports MICO mode and requests the use of MICO mode, then the UE shall include the MICO indication IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message. If the UE requests to use an active time value, it shall include the active time value in the T3324 IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.  Additionally, if the UE supports strictly periodic registration timer, the UE shall set the Strictly Periodic Registration Timer Indication bit of the MICO indication IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message to "strictly periodic registration timer supported". If the UE needs to stop the use of MICO mode, then the UE shall not include the MICO indication IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If the UE needs to use or change the UE specific DRX parameters, the UE shall include the Requested DRX parameters IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If the UE is in NB-N1 mode and if the UE needs to use or change the UE specific DRX parameters for NB-N1 mode, the UE shall include the Requested NB-N1 mode DRX parameters IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If the UE supports eDRX and requests the use of eDRX, the UE shall include the Requested extended DRX parameters IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If the UE needs to request LADN information for specific LADN DNN(s) or indicates a request for LADN information as specified in 3GPPTS23.501[8], the UE shall include the LADN indication IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and:

- request specific LADN DNNs by including a LADN DNN value in the LADN indication IE for each LADN DNN for which the UE requests LADN information; or

- to indicate a request for LADN information by not including any LADN DNN value in the LADN indication IE.

If the UE is initiating the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update, the UE may include the Uplink data status IE to indicate which PDU session(s) that is:

- not associated with control plane only indication;

- associated with the access type the REGISTRATION REQUEST message is sent over; and

- have pending user data to be sent over user plane.

If the UE has one or more active always-on PDU sessions associated with the access type over which the REGISTRATION REQUEST message is sent and the user-plane resources for these PDU sessions are not established, and for cases triggering the REGISTRATION REQUEST message except b), the UE shall include the Uplink data status IE and indicate that the UE has pending user data to be sent for those PDU sessions. If the UE is located outside the LADN service area, the UE shall not include the PDU session for LADN in the Uplink data status IE. If the UE is in a non-allowed area or is not in an allowed area as specified in subclause5.3.5, the UE shall not include the Uplink data status IE except for emergency services or for high priority access. If the MUSIM UE requests the network to release the NAS signalling connection, the UE shall not include the Uplink data status IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If the UE has one or more active PDU sessions which are not accepted by the network as always-on PDU sessions and no uplink user data pending to be sent for those PDU sessions, the UE shall not include those PDU sessions in the Uplink data status IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

When the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update is initiated in 5GMM-IDLE mode, the UE may include a PDU session status IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, indicating:

- which single access PDU sessions associated with the access type the REGISTRATION REQUEST message is sent over are active in the UE; and

- which MA PDU sessions are active and having user plane resources established in the UE on the access the REGISTRATION REQUEST message is sent over.

If the UE received a paging message with the access type indicating non-3GPP access, the UE shall include the Allowed PDU session status IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message. If the UE has established the PDU session(s) over the non-3GPP access for which the associated S-NSSAI(s) are included in the allowed NSSAI for 3GPP access, the UE shall indicate the PDU session(s) for which the UE allows to re-establish the user-plane resources over 3GPP access in the Allowed PDU session status IE. Otherwise, the UE shall not indicate any PDU session(s) in the Allowed PDU session status IE.

When the Allowed PDU session status IE is included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, the UE shall indicate that a PDU session is not allowed to be transferred to the 3GPP access if the 3GPP PS data off UE status is "activated" for the corresponding PDU session and the UE is not using the PDU session to send uplink IP packets for any of the 3GPP PS data off exempt services (see subclause6.2.10).

If the UE operating in the single-registration mode performs inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode, the UE:

a) shall include the UE status IE with the EMM registration status set to "UE is in EMM-REGISTERED state" in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message;

NOTE6: Inclusion of the UE status IE with this setting corresponds to the indication that the UE is "moving from EPC" as specified in 3GPPTS23.502[9], subclause4.11.1.3.3 and 4.11.2.3.

NOTE7: The value of the 5GMM registration status included by the UE in the UE status IE is not used by the AMF.

b) may include the PDU session status IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message indicating the status of the PDU session(s) mapped during the inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode from the PDN connection(s) for which the EPS indicated that interworking to 5GS is supported, if any (see subclause6.1.4.1);

c) shall include a TRACKING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] in the EPS NAS message container IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message if the registration procedure is initiated in 5GMM-IDLE mode and the UE has received an "interworking without N26 interface not supported" indication from the network;

c1) may include a TRACKING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] in the EPS NAS message container IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message if the registration procedure is initiated in 5GMM-IDLE mode and the UE has received an "interworking without N26 interface supported" indication from the network; and

d) shall include an EPS bearer context status IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message indicating which EPS bearer contexts are active in the UE, if the UE has locally deactivated EPS bearer context(s) for which interworking to 5GS is supported while the UE was in S1 mode without notifying the network.

For a REGISTRATION REQUEST message with a 5GS registration type IE indicating "mobility registration updating", if the UE:

a) is in NB-N1 mode and:

1) the UE needs to change the slice(s) it is currently registered to within the same registration area; or

2) the UE has entered a new registration area; or

b) the UE is not in NB-N1 mode and is not registered for onboarding services in SNPN;

the UE shall include the Requested NSSAI IE containing the S-NSSAI(s) corresponding to the network slices to which the UE intends to register and associated mapped S-NSSAI(s), if available, in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message as described in this subclause. When the UE is entering a visited PLMN and intends to register to the slices for which the UE has only HPLMN S-NSSAI(s) available, the UE shall include these HPLMN S-NSSAI(s) in the Requested mapped NSSAI IE.

NOTE8: The REGISTRATION REQUEST message can include both the Requested NSSAI IE and the Requested mapped NSSAI IE as described below.

If the UE is registered for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall not include the Requested NSSAI IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If the UE has allowed NSSAI or configured NSSAI or both for the current PLMN, the Requested NSSAI IE shall include either:

a) the configured NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN, or a subset thereof as described below;

b) the allowed NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN, or a subset thereof as described below; or

c) the allowed NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN, or a subset thereof as described below, plus one or more S-NSSAIs from the configured NSSAI for which no corresponding S-NSSAI is present in the allowed NSSAI and those are neither in the rejected NSSAI nor in the pending NSSAI.

and in addition the Requested NSSAI IE shall include S-NSSAI(s) applicable in the current PLMN or SNPN, and if available the associated mapped S-NSSAI(s) for:

a) each PDN connection that is established in S1 mode when the UE is operating in the single-registration mode and the UE is performing an inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode; or

b) each active PDU session.

If the UE does not have S-NSSAI(s) applicable in the current PLMN or SNPN, then the Requested mapped NSSAI IE shall include HPLMN S-NSSAI(s) (e.g. mapped S-NSSAI(s), if available) for:

a) each PDN connection established in S1 mode when the UE is operating in the single-registration mode and the UE is performing an inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode to a visited PLMN; or

b) each active PDU session when the UE is performing mobility from N1 mode to N1 mode to a visited PLMN.

NOTE9: The Requested NSSAI IE is used instead of Requested mapped NSSAI IE in REGISTRATION REQUEST message when the UE enters HPLMN.

For a REGISTRATION REQUEST message with a 5GS registration type IE indicating "mobility registration updating", if the UE is in NB-N1 mode and the procedure is initiated for all cases except case a), c), e), i), s), t), w), and x), the REGISTRATION REQUEST message shall not include the Requested NSSAI IE.

If the UE has:

- no allowed NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN;

- no configured NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN;

- neither active PDU session(s) nor PDN connection(s) to transfer associated with an S-NSSAI applicable in the current PLMN or SNPN; and

- neither active PDU session(s) nor PDN connection(s) to transfer associated with mapped S-NSSAI(s);

and has a default configured NSSAI, then the UE shall:

a) include the S-NSSAI(s) in the Requested NSSAI IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message using the default configured NSSAI; and

b) include the Network slicing indication IE with the Default configured NSSAI indication bit set to "Requested NSSAI created from default configured NSSAI" in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If the UE has:

- no allowed NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN;

- no configured NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN;

- neither active PDU session(s) nor PDN connection(s) to transfer associated with an S-NSSAI applicable in the current PLMN or SNPN

- neither active PDU session(s) nor PDN connection(s) to transfer associated with mapped S-NSSAI(s); and

- no default configured NSSAI,

the UE shall include neither Requested NSSAI IE nor Requested mapped NSSAI IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If all the S-NSSAI(s) corresponding to the slice(s) to which the UE intends to register are included in the pending NSSAI, the UE shall not include a requested NSSAI in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

When the UE storing a pending NSSAI intends to register to additional S-NSSAI(s) over the same access type, the UE shall send the requested NSSAI containing the additional S-NSSAI(s) that the UE intends to register to in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message. The requested NSSAI shall not include any S-NSSAI from the pending NSSAI.

The subset of configured NSSAI provided in the requested NSSAI consists of one or more S-NSSAIs in the configured NSSAI applicable to this PLMN or SNPN, if the S-NSSAI is neither in the rejected NSSAI nor associated to the S-NSSAI(s) in the rejected NSSAI. In addition, if the NSSRG information is available, the subset of configured NSSAI provided in the requested NSSAI shall be associated with at least one common NSSRG value. If the UE has already an allowed NSSAI for the other access, all the S-NSSAI(s) in the requested NSSAI for the current access shall share at least an NSSRG value common to all the S-NSSAI(s) of the allowed NSSAI for the other access. If the UE is simultaneously performing the registration procedure on the other access, the UE shall include S-NSSAIs that share at least a common NSSRG value across all access types.

NOTE10: If the UE has stored mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the rejected NSSAI, and one or more S-NSSAIs in the stored mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the configured NSSAI are not included in the stored mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the rejected NSSAI, then a S-NSSAI in the configured NSSAI associated to one or more of these mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the configured NSSAI are available to be included in the requested NSSAI together with their mapped S-NSSAI.

NOTE11: If one or more mapped S-NSSAIs in the stored mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the configured NSSAI are not included in the stored rejected NSSAI for the failed or revoked NSSAA, a S-NSSAI in the configured NSSAI associated to one or more of these mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the configured NSSAI are available to be included in the registration request together with their mapped S-NSSAI.

The subset of allowed NSSAI provided in the requested NSSAI consists of one or more S-NSSAIs in the allowed NSSAI for this PLMN.

NOTE12: How the UE selects the subset of configured NSSAI or allowed NSSAI to be provided in the requested NSSAI is implementation specific. The UE can take preferences indicated by the upper layers (e.g. policies like URSP, applications) and UE local configuration into account.

NOTE13: The number of S-NSSAI(s) included in the requested NSSAI cannot exceed eight.

If the UE supports NSAG, the UE shall set the NSAG bit to "NSAG supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

The UE shall set the Follow-on request indicator to "Follow-on request pending", if the UE:

a) initiates the mobility and periodic registration updating procedure upon request of the upper layers to establish an emergency PDU session;

b) initiates the mobility and periodic registration updating procedure upon receiving a request from the upper layers to perform emergency services fallback; or

c) needs to prolong the established NAS signalling connection after the completion of the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update (e.g. due to uplink signalling pending but no user data pending).

NOTE14: The UE does not have to set the Follow-on request indicator to 1 even if the UE has to request resources for V2X communication over PC5 reference point, ProSe direct discovery over PC5 or ProSe direct communication over PC5.

For case n), the UE shall include the 5GS update type IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message with the NG-RAN-RCU bit set to " UE radio capability update needed". Additionally, if the UE is not in NB-N1 mode, the UE supports RACS and the UE has an applicable UE radio capability ID for the new UE radio configuration in the serving PLMN or SNPN, the UE shall include the applicable UE radio capability ID in the UE radio capability ID of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If the UE is in the 5GMM-CONNECTED mode and the UE changes the radio capability for NG-RAN or EUTRAN, the UE may locally release the established N1 NAS signalling connection and enter the 5GMM-IDLE mode. Then, the UE shall initiate the registration procedure for mobility and periodic updating including the 5GS update type IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message with the NG-RAN-RCU bit set to " UE radio capability update needed".

For case o), the UE shall include the Uplink data status IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message indicating the PDU session(s) without active user-plane resources for which the UE has pending user data to be sent, if any, and the PDU session(s) for which user-plane resources were active prior to receiving the fallback indication, if any. If the UE is in a non-allowed area or if the UE is not in allowed area, the UE shall not include the Uplink data status IE in REGISTRATION REQUEST message, except if the PDU session for which user-plane resources were active prior to receiving the fallback indication is an emergency PDU session, or if the UE is configured for high priority access in the selected PLMN as specified in subclause5.3.5.

For case f), the UE shall include the Uplink data status IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message indicating the PDU session(s) for which user-plane resources were active prior to receiving "RRC Connection failure" indication from the lower layers, if any. If the UE is in non-allowed area or not in allowed area, the UE shall not include the Uplink data status IE in REGISTRATION REQUEST message, except that the PDU session(s) for which user-plane resources were active prior to receiving the "RRC Connection failure"indication is emergency PDU session(s), or that the UE is configured for high priority access in selected PLMN, as specified in subclause5.3.5.

If the UE supports service gap control, then the UE shall set the SGC bit to "service gap control supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

For case a), x) or if the UE operating in the single-registration mode performs inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode, the UE shall:

a) if the UE has an applicable network-assigned UE radio capability ID for the current UE radio configuration in the selected PLMN or SNPN, include the applicable network-assigned UE radio capability ID in the UE radio capability ID IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message; and

b) if the UE:

1) does not have an applicable network-assigned UE radio capability ID for the current UE radio configuration in the selected PLMN or SNPN; and

2) has an applicable manufacturer-assigned UE radio capability ID for the current UE radio configuration,

 include the applicable manufacturer-assigned UE radio capability ID in the UE radio capability ID IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

For all cases except cases b and z, if the UE supports ciphered broadcast assistance data and the UE needs to obtain new ciphering keys, the UE shall include the Additional information requested IE with the CipherKey bit set to "ciphering keys for ciphered broadcast assistance data requested" in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

For case z, the UE shall include the Additional information requested IE with the CipherKey bit set to "ciphering keys for ciphered broadcast assistance data requested" in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

For case a, if the UE supports ciphered broadcast assistance data and the UE detects that one or more ciphering keys stored at the UE is not applicable in the current TAI, the UE should include the Additional information requested IE with the CipherKey bit set to "ciphering keys for ciphered broadcast assistance data requested" in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

For case b, if the UE supports ciphered broadcast assistance data and the remaining validity time for one or more ciphering keys stored at the UE is less than timer T3512, the UE should include the Additional information requested IE with the CipherKey bit set to "ciphering keys for ciphered broadcast assistance data requested" in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

The UE shall set the WUSA bit to "WUS assistance information reception supported" in the 5GMM capability IE if the UE supports WUS assistance information. The UE may include its UE paging probability information in the Requested WUS assistance information IE if the UE has set the WUSA bit to "WUS assistance information reception supported" in the 5GMM capability IE and does not have an active emergency PDU session.

The UE shall set the NR-PSSI bit to "NR paging subgrouping supported" in the 5GMM capability IE if the UE supports PEIPS assistance information, is not registered for emergency services and does not have an active emergency PDU session. The UE may include its UE paging probability information in the Requested PEIPS assistance information IE if the UE has set the NR-PSSI bit to "NR paging subgrouping supported" in the 5GMM capability IE.

If the network supports the N1 NAS signalling connection release, and the MUSIM UE requests the network to release the NAS signalling connection, the UE shall set Request type to "NAS signalling connection release" in the UE request type IE, set the Follow-on request indicator to "No follow-on request pending" and, if the network supports the paging restriction, may set the paging restriction preference in the Paging restriction IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message. In addition, the UE shall not include the Uplink data status IE or the Allowed PDU session status IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message even if the UE has one or more active always-on PDU sessions associated with the 3GPP access.

NOTE15: If the network has already indicated support for N1 NAS signalling connection release in the current stored registration area and the UE doesn't have an emergency PDU session established, the MUSIM UE is allowed to request the network to release the NAS signalling connection during mobility registration update procedure that is due to mobility outside the registration area even before detecting whether the network supports the N1 NAS signalling connection release in the current TAI.

NOTE16: If the network has already indicated support for paging restriction in the current stored registration area and the UE doesn't have an emergency PDU session established, the MUSIM UE is allowed to include paging restriction together with the request to the network to release the NAS signalling connection during mobility registration update procedure that is due to mobility outside the registration area even before detecting whether the network supports the paging restriction in the current TAI.

For case zi), the UE shall not include the Paging restriction IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message. If the UE is in 5GMM-IDLE mode and the network supports the N1 NAS signalling connection release, the UE may include the UE request type IE and set Request type to "NAS signalling connection release" to remove the paging restriction and request the release of the NAS signalling connection at the same time. In addition, the UE shall not include the Uplink data status IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If the UE does not have a valid 5G NAS security context and the UE is sending the REGISTRATION REQUEST message after an inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode in 5GMM-IDLE mode, the UE shall send the REGISTRATION REQUEST message without including the NAS message container IE. The UE shall include the entire REGISTRATION REQUEST message (i.e. containing cleartext IEs and non-cleartext IEs, if any) in the NAS message container IE that is sent as part of the SECURITY MODE COMPLETE message as described in subclauses4.4.6 and5.4.2.3.

If the UE indicates "mobility registration updating" in the 5GS registration type IE and supports V2X as specified in 3GPPTS24.587[19B], the UE shall set the V2X bit to "V2X supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message. If the UE indicates "mobility registration updating" in the 5GS registration type IE and supports V2X communication over E-UTRA-PC5 as specified in 3GPPTS24.587[19B], the UE shall set the V2XCEPC5 bit to "V2X communication over E-UTRA-PC5 supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message. If the UE indicates "mobility registration updating" in the 5GS registration type IE and supports V2X communication over NR-PC5 as specified in 3GPPTS24.587[19B], the UE shall set the V2XCNPC5 bit to "V2X communication over NR-PC5 supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

The UE shall send the REGISTRATION REQUEST message including the NAS message container IE as described in subclause4.4.6:

a) when the UE is sending the message from 5GMM-IDLE mode, the UE has a valid 5G NAS security context, and needs to send non-cleartext IEs; or

b) when the UE is sending the message after an inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode in 5GMM-IDLE mode and the UE has a valid 5G NAS security context and needs to send non-cleartext IEs.

The UE with a valid 5G NAS security context shall send the REGISTRATION REQUEST message without including the NAS message container IE when the UE does not need to send non-cleartext IEs and the UE is sending the message:

a) from 5GMM-IDLE mode; or

b) after an inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode in 5GMM-IDLE mode.

If the UE is sending the REGISTRATION REQUEST message after an inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode and the UE needs to send non-cleartext IEs, the UE shall cipher the NAS message container IE using the mapped 5G NAS security context and send the REGISTRATION REQUEST message including the NAS message container IE as described in subclause4.4.6. If the UE does not need to send non-cleartext IEs, the UE shall send the REGISTRATION REQUEST message without including the NAS message container IE.

If the REGISTRATION REQUEST message includes a NAS message container IE, the AMF shall process the REGISTRATION REQUEST message that is obtained from the NAS message container IE as described in subclause4.4.6.

If the UE is in NB-N1 mode, then the UE shall set the Control plane CIoT 5GS optimization bit to "Control plane CIoT 5GS optimization supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message. If the UE is capable of NB-S1 mode, then the UE shall set the Control plane CIoT EPS optimization bit to "Control plane CIoT EPS optimization supported" in the S1 UE network capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update is initiated and there is request from the upper layers to perform "emergency services fallback" pending, the UE shall send a REGISTRATION REQUEST message without an Uplink data status IE.

If the UE supports N3 data transfer and multiple user-plane resources in NB-N1 mode (see 3GPPTS36.306[25D], 3GPPTS36.331[25A]), then the UE shall set the Multiple user-plane resources support bit to "Multiple user-plane resources supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

The UE shall set the ER-NSSAI bit to "Extended rejected NSSAI supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If the UE supports the NSSRG, then the UE shall set the NSSRG bit to "NSSRG supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

For case zf), the UE shall include the service-level device ID in the Service-level-AA container IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and set the value to the CAA-level UAV ID. The UE shall include the service-level-AA server address in the Service-level-AA container IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and set the value to the USS address, if it is provided by the upper layers.

If the UE supports ProSe direct discovery as specified in 3GPPTS24.554[19E], the UE shall set the ProSe-dd bit to "ProSe direct discovery supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message. If the UE supports ProSe direct communication as specified in 3GPPTS24.554[19E], the UE shall set the ProSe-dc bit to "ProSe discovery communication supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message. If the UE supports acting as ProSe layer-2 UE-to-network relay UE as specified in 3GPPTS24.554[19E], the UE shall set the ProSe-l2relay bit to "Acting as a ProSe layer-2 UE-to-network relay UE supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message. If the UE supports acting as ProSe layer-3 UE-to-network relay UE as specified in 3GPPTS24.554[19E], the UE shall set the ProSe-l3relay bit to "Acting as a ProSe layer-3 UE-to-network relay UE supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message. If the UE supports acting as ProSe layer-2 UE-to-network remote UE as specified in 3GPPTS24.554[19E], the UE shall set the ProSe-l2rmt bit to "Acting as a ProSe layer-2 UE-to-network remote UE supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message. If the UE supports acting as ProSe layer-3 UE-to-network remote UE as specified in 3GPPTS24.554[19E], the UE shall set the ProSe-l3rmt bit to "Acting as a ProSe layer-3 UE-to-network remote UE supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

For all cases except case b, if the MUSIM UE supports the N1 NAS signalling connection release, then the UE shall set the N1 NAS signalling connection release bit to "N1 NAS signalling connection release supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message otherwise the UE shall not set the N1 NAS signalling connection release bit to "N1 NAS signalling connection release supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

For all cases except case b, if the MUSIM UE supports the paging indication for voice services, then the UE shall set the paging indication for voice services bit to "paging indication for voice services supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message otherwise the UE shall not set the paging indication for voice services bit to "paging indication for voice services supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

For all cases except case b, if the MUSIM UE supports the reject paging request, then the UE shall set the reject paging request bit to "reject paging request supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message otherwise the UE shall not set the reject paging request bit to "reject paging request supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

For all cases except case b, if the MUSIM UE sets:

- the reject paging request bit to "reject paging request supported";

- the N1 NAS signalling connection release bit to "N1 NAS signalling connection release supported"; or

- both of them;

and supports the paging restriction, then the UE shall set the paging restriction bit to "paging restriction supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message otherwise the UE shall not set the paging restriction bit to "paging restriction supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If the UE supports MINT, the UE shall set the MINT bit to "MINT supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

For case zg), if the UE has determined the MS determined PLMN with disaster condition as specified in 3GPPTS23.122[5], and:

a) the MS determined PLMN with disaster condition is the HPLMN and:

1) the Additional GUTI IE is included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and does not contain a valid 5G-GUTI that was previously assigned by the HPLMN; or

2) the Additional GUTI IE is not included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and the 5GS mobile identity IE contains neither the SUCI nor a valid 5G-GUTI that was previously assigned by the HPLMN; or

b) the MS determined PLMN with disaster condition is not the HPLMN and:

1) the Additional GUTI IE is included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and does not contain a valid 5G-GUTI that was previously assigned by the MS determined PLMN with disaster condition; or

2) the Additional GUTI IE is not included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and the 5GS mobile identity IE does not contain a valid 5G-GUTI that was previously assigned by the MS determined PLMN with disaster condition;

the UE shall include in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message the MS determined PLMN with disaster condition IE indicating the MS determined PLMN with disaster condition.

NOTE17:  If the UE initiates the registration procedure for disaster roaming services, and the MS determined PLMN with disaster condition cannot be determined when an NG-RAN cell of the PLMN broadcasts the disaster related indication as specified in 3GPPTS23.122[5], the UE does not include in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message the MS determined PLMN with disaster condition IE but includes the Additional GUTI IE or the 5GS mobile identity IE or both as specified in subclauses5.5.1.2.2.

For case zh) the UE shall indicate "mobility registration updating" in the 5GS registration type IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If the UE supports event notification, the UE shall set the EventNotification bit to "Event notification supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder and the UE is in its HPLMN or EHPLMN or a subscribed SNPN, the UE shall set the SSNPNSI bit to "SOR-SNPN-SI supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.



Figure5.5.1.3.2.1: Registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update

5.5.1.3.3 5GMM common procedure initiation

The AMF may initiate 5GMM common procedures, e.g. the identification, authentication and security procedures during the registration procedure, depending on the information received in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

 The AMF may be configured to skip the authentication procedure even if no 5GS security context is available and proceed directly to the execution of the security mode control procedure as specified in subclause5.4.2, during the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update for a UE that has only an emergency PDU session.

 The AMF shall not initiate a 5GMM authentication procedure before completion of the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update, if the following conditions apply:

a) the UE initiated the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update after handover or inter-system change to N1 mode in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode;

b) the target cell is a shared network cell; and

c.1) the UE has provided its 5G-GUTI in the 5GS mobile identity IE or the Additional GUTI IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, and the PLMN identity included in the 5G-GUTI is different from the selected PLMN identity of the target cell; or

c.2) the UE has included the 5G-GUTI mapped from the 4G-GUTI in the 5GS mobile identity IE and not included an Additional GUTI IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, and the PLMN identity included in the 5G-GUTI is different from the selected PLMN identity of the target cell.

5.5.1.3.4 Mobility and periodic registration update accepted by the network

If the registration update request has been accepted by the network, the AMF shall send a REGISTRATION ACCEPT message to the UE.

If timer T3513 is running in the AMF, the AMF shall stop timer T3513 if a paging request was sent with the access type indicating non-3GPP and the REGISTRATION REQUEST message includes the Allowed PDU session status IE.

If timer T3565 is running in the AMF, the AMF shall stop timer T3565 when a REGISTRATION REQUEST message is received.

For each of the information elements: 5GMM capability, S1 UE network capability, and UE security capability, the AMF shall store all octets received from the UE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, up to the maximum length defined for the respective information element.

NOTE1: This information is forwarded to the new AMF during inter-AMF handover or to the new MME during inter-system handover to S1 mode.

The 5G-GUTI reallocation shall be part of the registration procedure for mobility registration update. The 5G-GUTI reallocation should be part of the registration procedure for periodic registration update. During the registration procedure for mobility registration update, if the AMF has not allocated a new 5G-GUTI by the generic UE configuration update procedure, the AMF shall include in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message the new assigned 5G-GUTI.

If the UE has set the CAG bit to "CAG supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and the AMF needs to update the "CAG information list" stored in the UE, the AMF shall include the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

NOTE2: The "CAG information list" can be provided by the AMF and include no entry if no "CAG information list" exists in the subscription.

NOTE2A: If the UE supports extended CAG information list, the CAG information list can be included either in the CAG information list IE or Extended CAG information list IE.

If the UE does not support extended CAG information list, the CAG information list shall not be included in the Extended CAG information list IE.

If a 5G-GUTI or the SOR transparent container IE is included in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message, the AMF shall start timer T3550 and enter state 5GMM-COMMON-PROCEDURE-INITIATED as described in subclause5.1.3.2.3.3.

If the Operator-defined access category definitions IE or the Extended emergency number list IE ,the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE are included in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message, the AMF shall start timer T3550 and enter state 5GMM-COMMON-PROCEDURE-INITIATED as described in subclause5.1.3.2.3.3.

If the UE is not in NB-N1 mode and the UE has set the RACS bit to "RACS supported" in the 5GMM Capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, the AMF may include either a UE radio capability ID IE or a UE radio capability ID deletion indication IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. If the UE radio capability ID IE or the UE radio capability ID deletion indication IE is included in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message, the AMF shall start timer T3550 and enter state 5GMM-COMMON-PROCEDURE-INITIATED as described in subclause5.1.3.2.3.3.

The AMF may include a new TAI list for the UE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. The new TAI list shall not contain both tracking areas in NB-N1 mode and tracking areas not in NB-N1 mode. The UE, upon receiving a REGISTRATION ACCEPT message, shall delete its old TAI list and store the received TAI list. If there is no TAI list received, the UE shall consider the old TAI list as valid. If the registration area contains TAIs belonging to different PLMNs, which are equivalent PLMNs, and

a) the UE already has stored allowed NSSAI for the current registration area, the UE shall store the allowed NSSAI for the current registration area in each of the allowed NSSAIs which are associated with each of the PLMNs in the registration area; and

b) the UE already has stored rejected NSSAI for the current registration area, the UE shall store the rejected NSSAI for the current registration area in each of the rejected NSSAIs which are associated with each of the PLMNs in the registration area.

NOTE3: When assigning the TAI list, the AMF can take into account the eNodeB's capability of support of CIoT 5GS optimization.

The AMF may also include a list of equivalent PLMNs in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. Each entry in the list contains a PLMN code (MCC+MNC). The UE shall store the list as provided by the network, and if there is no emergency PDU session established, the UE shall remove from the list any PLMN code that is already in the forbidden PLMN list as specified in subclause5.3.13A. If the UE is not registered for emergency services and there is an emergency PDU session established, the UE shall remove from the list of equivalent PLMNs any PLMN code present in the forbidden PLMN list as specified in subclause5.3.13A, when the emergency PDU session is released. In addition, the UE shall add to the stored list the PLMN code of the registered PLMN that sent the list. The UE shall replace the stored list on each receipt of the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. If the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message does not contain a list, then the UE shall delete the stored list.

If the UE is not registered for emergency services, and if the PLMN identity of the registered PLMN is a member of the forbidden PLMN list as specified in subclause5.3.13A, any such PLMN identity shall be deleted from the corresponding list(s).

The AMF may include new service area restrictions in the Service area list IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. The UE, upon receiving a REGISTRATION ACCEPT message with new service area restrictions shall act as described in subclause5.3.5.

If the Service area list IE is not included in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message, any tracking area in the registered PLMN and its equivalent PLMN(s) in the registration area is considered as an allowed tracking area as described in subclause5.3.5.

The AMF shall include the MICO indication IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message only if the MICO indication IE was included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, the AMF supports and accepts the use of MICO mode. If the AMF supports and accepts the use of MICO mode, the AMF may indicate "all PLMN registration area allocated" in the MICO indication IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. If "all PLMN registration area allocated" is indicated in the MICO indication IE, the AMF shall not assign and include the TAI list in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. If the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message includes an MICO indication IE indicating "all PLMN registration area allocated", the UE shall treat all TAIs in the current PLMN as a registration area and delete its old TAI list. If "strictly periodic registration timer supported" is indicated in the MICO indication IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, the AMF may indicate "strictly periodic registration timer supported" in the MICO indication IE and may include the T3512 value IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. If the timer value received in T3512 IE is different from the already stored value of the timer T3512 and the timer T3512 is running, the UE shall restart T3512 with the new value received in the T3512 value IE.

The AMF shall include an active time value in the T3324 IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message if the UE requested an active time value in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and the AMF accepts the use of MICO mode and the use of active time.

If the UE does not include MICO indication IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, then the AMF shall disable MICO mode if it was already enabled.

The AMF may include the T3512 value IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message only if the REGISTRATION REQUEST message was sent over the 3GPP access.

The AMF may include the non-3GPP de-registration timer value IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message only if the REGISTRATION REQUEST message was sent for the non-3GPP access.

If the UE indicates support of the N1 NAS signalling connection release in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and the network decides to accept the N1 NAS signalling connection release, then the AMF shall set the N1 NAS signalling connection release bit to "N1 NAS signalling connection release supported" in the 5GS network feature support IE of the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

If the UE indicates support of the paging indication for voice services in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and the network decides to accept the paging indication for voice services, then the AMF shall set the paging indication for voice services bit to "paging indication for voice services supported" in the 5GS network feature support IE of the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. If the UE receives the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message with the paging indication for voice services bit set to "paging indication for voice services supported", the UE NAS layer informs the lower layers that paging indication for voice services is supported. Otherwise, the UE NAS layer informs the lower layers that paging indication for voice services is not supported.

If the UE indicates support of the reject paging request in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and the network decides to accept the reject paging request, then the AMF shall set the reject paging request bit to "reject paging request supported" in the 5GS network feature support IE of the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

If the UE indicates support of the paging restriction in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, and the AMF sets:

- the reject paging request bit to "reject paging request supported";

- the N1 NAS signalling connection release bit to "N1 NAS signalling connection release supported"; or

- both of them;

in the 5GS network feature support IE of the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message, and the network decides to accept the paging restriction, then the AMF shall set the paging restriction bit to "paging restriction supported" in the 5GS network feature support IE of the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

If the MUSIM UE does not include the Paging restriction IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, the AMF shall delete any stored paging restriction for the UE and stop restricting paging.

If the MUSIM UE requests the release of the NAS signalling connection, by setting Request type to "NAS signalling connection release" in the UE request type IE included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, and the AMF supports the N1 NAS signalling connection release, the AMF shall initiate the release of the NAS signalling connection after the completion of the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update. If the UE requests restriction of paging by including the Paging restriction IE and the AMF supports the paging restriction, the AMF:

- if accepts the paging restriction, shall include the 5GS additional request result IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message and set the Paging restriction decision to "paging restriction is accepted". The AMF shall store the paging restriction of the UE and enforce these restrictions in the paging procedure as described in clause5.6.2; or

- if rejects the paging restriction, shall include the 5GS additional request result IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message and set the Paging restriction decision to "paging restriction is rejected", and shall discard the received paging restriction. The AMF shall delete any stored paging restriction for the UE and stop restricting paging.

If the UE requests "control plane CIoT 5GS optimization" in the 5GS update type IE, indicates support of control plane CIoT 5GS optimization in the 5GMM capability IE and the AMF decides to accept the requested CIoT 5GS optimization and the registration request, the AMF shall indicate "control plane CIoT 5GS optimization supported" in the 5GS network feature support IE of the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

If the UE has indicated support for the control plane CIoT 5GS optimizations, and the AMF decides to activate the congestion control for transport of user data via the control plane, then the AMF shall include the T3448 value IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

If the AMF decides to deactivate the congestion control for transport of user data via the control plane, then the AMF shall delete the stored control plane data back-off time for the UE and the AMF shall not include timer T3448 value IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

If:

- the UE in NB-N1 mode is using control plane CIoT 5GS optimization; and

- the network is configured to provide the truncated 5G-S-TMSI configuration for control plane CIoT 5GS optimizations;

the AMF shall include the Truncated 5G-S-TMSI configuration IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message and set the "Truncated AMF Set ID value" and the "Truncated AMF Pointer value" in the Truncated 5G-S-TMSI configuration IE based on network policies. The AMF shall start timer T3550 and enter state 5GMM-COMMON-PROCEDURE-INITIATED as described in subclause5.1.3.2.3.3.

For inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode in 5GMM-IDLE mode, if the UE has included a ngKSI indicating a current 5G NAS security context in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message by which the REGISTRATION REQUEST message is integrity protected, the AMF shall take one of the following actions:

a) if the AMF retrieves the current 5G NAS security context as indicated by the ngKSI and 5G-GUTI sent by the UE, the AMF shall integrity check the REGISTRATION REQUEST message using the current 5G NAS security context and integrity protect the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message using the current 5G NAS security context;

b) if the AMF cannot retrieve the current 5G NAS security context as indicated by the ngKSI and 5G-GUTI sent by the UE, the AMF shall treat the REGISTRATION REQUEST message fails the integrity check and take actions as specified in subclause4.4.4.3; or

c) if the UE has not included an Additional GUTI IE, the AMF may treat the REGISTRATION REQUEST message as in the previous item, i.e. as if it cannot retrieve the current 5G NAS security context.

NOTE4: The handling described above at failure to retrieve the current 5G NAS security context or if no Additional GUTI IE was provided does not preclude the option for the AMF to perform a primary authentication and key agreement procedure and create a new native 5G NAS security context.

For inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode, the AMF shall integrity check REGISTRATION REQUEST message using the current K'AMF as derived when triggering the handover to N1 mode (see subclause4.4.2.2). The AMF shall verify the received UE security capabilities in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message. The AMF shall then take one of the following actions:

a) if the REGISTRATION REQUEST does not contain a valid KSIAMF in the Non-current native NAS key set identifier IE, the AMF shall remove the non-current native 5G NAS security context, if any, for any 5G-GUTI for this UE. The AMF shall then integrity protect and cipher the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message using the security context based on K'AMF and take the mapped 5G NAS security context into use; or

b) if the REGISTRATION REQUEST contains a valid KSIAMF in the Non-current native NAS key set identifier IE and:

1) the AMF decides to take the native 5G NAS security context into use, the AMF shall initiate a security mode control procedure to take the corresponding native 5G NAS security context into use and then integrity protect and cipher the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message using the corresponding native 5G NAS security context; and

2) otherwise, the AMF shall then integrity protect and cipher the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message using the security context based on K'AMF and take the mapped 5G NAS security context into use.

NOTE5: In above bullet b), it is recommended for the AMF to initiate a security mode control procedure to take the corresponding native 5G NAS security context into use.

If the UE has included the service-level device ID set to the CAA-level UAV ID in the Service-level-AA container IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, and if:

- the UE has a valid aerial UE subscription information; and

- the UUAA procedure is to be performed during the registration procedure according to operator policy; and

- there is no valid successful UUAA result for the UE in the UE 5GMM context,

then the AMF shall initiate the UUAA-MM procedure with the UAS-NF as specified in TS23.256[6AB] and shall include a service-level-AA pending indication in the Service-level-AA container IE of the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. The AMF shall store in the UE 5GMM context that a UUAA procedure is pending. The AMF shall start timer T3550 and enter state 5GMM-COMMON-PROCEDURE-INITIATED as described in subclause5.1.3.2.3.3. 

If the UE has included the service-level device ID set to the CAA-level UAV ID in the Service-level-AA container IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, and if:

- the UE has a valid aerial UE subscription information; 

- the UUAA procedure is to be performed during the registration procedure according to operator policy; and

- there is a valid successful UUAA result for the UE in the UE 5GMM context,

then the AMF shall include a service-level-AA response in the Service-level-AA container IE of the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message and set the SLAR field in the service-level-AA response to "Service level authentication and authorization was successful".

If the AMF determines that the UUAA-MM procedure needs to be performed for a UE, the AMF has not received the service -level device ID set to the CAA-level UAV ID in the Service-level-AA container IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message from the UE and the AMF decides to accept the UE to be registered for other services than UAS services based on the user's subscription data and the operator policy, the AMF shall accept the registration update request and shall mark in the UE's 5GMM context that the UE is not allowed to request UAS services.

If the UE supports MINT, the AMF may include the List of PLMNs to be used in disaster condition IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

If the UE supports MINT, the AMF may include the Disaster roaming wait range IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

If the UE supports MINT, the AMF may include the Disaster return wait range IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

NOTE6: The AMF can determine the content of the "list of PLMN(s) to be used in disaster condition", the value of the disaster roaming wait range and the value of the disaster return wait range based on the network local configuration.

If the AMF received the list of TAIs from the satellite NG-RAN as described in 3GPPTS23.501[8], and determines that any but not all TAIs in the received list of TAIs is forbidden for roaming or for regional provision of service as per information from the UDM and operator's choice, the AMF shall include the TAI(s) in:

a) the Forbidden TAI(s) for the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" IE; or

b) the Forbidden TAI(s) for the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service" IE; or

c) both;

in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

NOTE7a: "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" corresponds to cause values #13 and #15, and "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service" corresponds cause value #12.

Upon receipt of the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message, the UE shall reset the registration attempt counter and service request attempt counter, enter state 5GMM-REGISTERED and set the 5GS update status to 5U1 UPDATED.

If the UE receives the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message from a PLMN, then the UE shall reset the PLMN-specific attempt counter for that PLMN for the specific access type for which the message was received. The UE shall also reset the PLMN-specific N1 mode attempt counter for that PLMN for the specific access type for which the message was received. If the message was received via 3GPP access, the UE shall reset the counter for "SIM/USIM considered invalid for GPRS services" events and the counter for "SIM/USIM considered invalid for non-GPRS services", if any. If the message was received via non-3GPP access, the UE shall reset the counter for "USIM considered invalid for 5GS services over non-3GPP" events.

If the UE receives the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message from an SNPN, then the UE shall reset the SNPN-specific attempt counter for the current SNPN for the specific access type for which the message was received. If the message was received via 3GPP access, the UE shall reset the counter for "the entry for the current SNPN considered invalid for 3GPP access" events. If the message was received via non-3GPP access, the UE shall reset the counter for "the entry for the current SNPN considered invalid for non-3GPP access" events.

If the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message included a T3512 value IE, the UE shall use the value in T3512 value IE as periodic registration update timer (T3512). If the T3512 value IE is not included, the UE shall use the value currently stored, e.g. from a prior REGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

If the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message include a T3324 value IE, the UE shall use the value in the T3324 value IE as active time timer (T3324). If the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message does not include a T3324 value IE, UE shall not start the timer T3324 until a new value is received from the network.

If the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message included a non-3GPP de-registration timer value IE, the UE shall use the value in non-3GPP de-registration timer value IE as non-3GPP de-registration timer. If non-3GPP de-registration timer value IE is not included, the UE shall use the value currently stored, e.g. from a prior REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. If non-3GPP de-registration timer value IE is not included and there is no stored non-3GPP de-registration timer value in the UE, the UE shall use the default value of the non-3GPP de-registration timer.

If the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message contains a 5G-GUTI, the UE shall return a REGISTRATION COMPLETE message to the AMF to acknowledge the received 5G-GUTI, stop timer T3519 if running, and delete any stored SUCI. The UE shall provide the 5G-GUTI to the lower layer of 3GPP access if the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message is sent over the non-3GPP access, and the UE is in 5GMM-REGISTERED in both 3GPP access and non-3GPP access in the same PLMN.

If the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message contains the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE and the UE had set the CAG bit to "CAG supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, the UE shall:

a) replace the "CAG information list" stored in the UE with the received CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE when received in the HPLMN or EHPLMN;

b) replace the serving VPLMN's entry of the "CAG information list" stored in the UE with the serving VPLMN's entry of the received CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE when the UE receives the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE in a serving PLMN other than the HPLMN or EHPLMN; or

NOTE7: When the UE receives the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE in a serving PLMN other than the HPLMN or EHPLMN, entries of a PLMN other than the serving VPLMN, if any, in the received CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE are ignored.

c) remove the serving VPLMN's entry of the "CAG information list" stored in the UE when the UE receives the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE in a serving PLMN other than the HPLMN or EHPLMN and the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE does not contain the serving VPLMN's entry.

The UE shall store the "CAG information list" received in the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE as specified in annexC.

If the received "CAG information list" includes an entry containing the identity of the registered PLMN, the UE shall operate as follows.

a) if the UE receives the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message via a CAG cell, the entry for the registered PLMN in the received "CAG information list" does not include any of the CAG-ID(s) supported by the current CAG cell, and:

1) the entry for the registered PLMN in the received "CAG information list" does not include an "indication that the UE is only allowed to access 5GS via CAG cells", then the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE and shall search for a suitable cell according to 3GPPTS38.304[28] or 3GPPTS36.304[25C] with the updated "CAG information list"; or

2) the entry for the registered PLMN in the received "CAG information list" includes an "indication that the UE is only allowed to access 5GS via CAG cells" and:

i) if the entry for the registered PLMN in the received "CAG information list" includes one or more CAG-IDs, the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE and shall search for a suitable cell according to 3GPPTS38.304[28] with the updated "CAG information list"; or

ii) if the entry for the registered PLMN in the received "CAG information list" does not include any CAG-ID and:

A) the UE does not have an emergency PDU session, then the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH and shall apply the PLMN selection process defined in 3GPP TS 23.122 [5] with the updated "CAG information list"; or

B) the UE has an emergency PDU session, then the UE shall perform a local release of all PDU sessions associated with 3GPP access except for the emergency PDU session and enter the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE; or

b) if the UE receives the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message via a non-CAG cell and the entry for the registered PLMN in the received "CAG information list" includes an "indication that the UE is only allowed to access 5GS via CAG cells" and:

1) if the "allowed CAG list" for the registered PLMN in the received "CAG information list" includes one or more CAG-IDs, the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE and shall search for a suitable cell according to 3GPPTS38.304[28] with the updated "CAG information list"; or

2) if the entry for the registered PLMN in the received "CAG information list" does not include any CAG-ID and:

i) the UE does not have an emergency PDU session, then the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH and shall apply the PLMN selection process defined in 3GPP TS 23.122 [5] with the updated "CAG information list"; or

ii) the UE has an emergency PDU session, then the UE shall perform a local release of all PDU sessions associated with 3GPP access except for the emergency PDU session and enter the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE.

If the received "CAG information list" does not include an entry containing the identity of the registered PLMN and the UE receives the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message via a CAG cell, the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE and shall search for a suitable cell according to 3GPPTS38.304[28] or 3GPPTS36.304[25C] with the updated "CAG information list".

If the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message contains the Operator-defined access category definitions IE, the Extended emergency number list IE, the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE, the UE shall return a REGISTRATION COMPLETE message to the AMF to acknowledge reception of the operator-defined access category definitions or the extended local emergency numbers list or the CAG information list.

If the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message contains the UE radio capability ID IE or the UE radio capability ID deletion indication IE, the UE shall return a REGISTRATION COMPLETE message to the AMF to acknowledge reception of the UE radio capability ID IE or the UE radio capability ID deletion indication IE.

If the T3448 value IE is present in the received REGISTRATION ACCEPT message and the value indicates that this timer is neither zero nor deactivated, the UE shall:

a) stop timer T3448 if it is running; and

b) start timer T3448 with the value provided in the T3448 value IE.

If the UE is using 5GS services with control plane CIoT 5GS optimization, the T3448 value IE is present in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message and the value indicates that this timer is either zero or deactivated, the UE shall ignore the T3448 value IE and proceed as if the T3448 value IE was not present.

If the UE in 5GMM-IDLE mode initiated the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update and the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message does not include the T3448 value IE and if timer T3448 is running, then the UE shall stop timer T3448.

Upon receiving a REGISTRATION COMPLETE message, the AMF shall stop timer T3550 and change to state 5GMM-REGISTERED. The 5G-GUTI, if sent in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message, shall be considered as valid, and the UE radio capability ID, if sent in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message, shall be considered as valid.

If the 5GS update type IE was included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message with the SMS requested bit set to "SMS over NAS supported" and:

a) the SMSF address is stored in the UE 5GMM context and:

1) the UE is considered available for SMS over NAS; or

2) the UE is considered not available for SMS over NAS and the SMSF has confirmed that the activation of the SMS service is successful; or

b) the SMSF address is not stored in the UE 5GMM context, the SMSF selection is successful and the SMSF has confirmed that the activation of the SMS service is successful;

then the AMF shall set the SMS allowed bit of the 5GS registration result IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message as specified in subclause5.5.1.2.4. If the UE 5GMM context does not contain an SMSF address or the UE is not considered available for SMS over NAS, then the AMF shall:

a) store the SMSF address in the UE 5GMM context if not stored already; and

b) store the value of the SMS allowed bit of the 5GS registration result IE in the UE 5GMM context and consider the UE available for SMS over NAS.

If SMSF selection in the AMF or SMS activation via the SMSF is not successful, or the AMF does not allow the use of SMS over NAS, then the AMF shall set the SMS allowed bit of the 5GS registration result IE to "SMS over NAS not allowed" in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

If the 5GS update type IE was included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message with the SMS requested bit set to "SMS over NAS not supported" or the 5GS update type IE was not included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, then the AMF shall:

a) mark the 5GMM context to indicate that the UE is not available for SMS over NAS; and

NOTE8: The AMF can notify the SMSF that the UE is deregistered from SMS over NAS based on local configuration.

b) set the SMS allowed bit of the 5GS registration result IE to "SMS over NAS not allowed" in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

When the UE receives the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message, if the UE is also registered over another access to the same PLMN, the UE considers the value indicated by the SMS allowed bit of the 5GS registration result IE as applicable for both accesses over which the UE is registered.

If the 5GS update type IE was included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message with the NG-RAN-RCU bit set to "UE radio capability update needed", the AMF shall delete the stored UE radio capability information or the UE radio capability ID, if any.

The AMF shall include the 5GS registration result IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. If the 5GS registration result IE value indicates:

a) "3GPP access", the UE:

- shall consider itself as being registered to 3GPP access only; and

- if in 5GMM-REGISTERED state over non-3GPP access and on the same PLMN as 3GPP access, shall enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-REGISTRATION over non-3GPP access and set the 5GS update status to 5U2 NOT UPDATED over non-3GPP access;

b) "Non-3GPP access", the UE:

- shall consider itself as being registered to non-3GPP access only; and

- if in the 5GMM-REGISTERED state over 3GPP access and is on the same PLMN as non-3GPP access, shall enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-REGISTRATION over 3GPP access and set the 5GS update status to 5U2 NOT UPDATED over 3GPP access; or

c) "3GPP access and Non-3GPP access", the UE shall consider itself as being registered to both 3GPP access and non-3GPP access.

If the UE is not currently registered for emergency services and the 5GS registration result IE value in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message is set to "Registered for emergency services", the UE shall consider itself registered for emergency services and shall locally release all non-emergency PDU sessions, if any.

The AMF shall include the allowed NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN and shall include the mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the allowed NSSAI contained in the requested NSSAI (i.e. Requested NSSAI IE or Requested mapped NSSAI IE) from the UE if available, in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message if the UE included the requested NSSAI in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and the AMF allows one or more S-NSSAIs for the current PLMN or SNPN in the Requested NSSAI IE or one or more mapped S-NSSAIs in the Requested NSSAI IE or Requested mapped NSSAI IE. The S-NSSAI associated with each of the active PDN connections for which interworking to 5GS is supported, shall be included in the allowed NSSAI if the UE included the UE status IE with the EMM registration status set to "UE is in EMM-REGISTERED state" in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and the AMF supports N26 interface.

The AMF may also include rejected NSSAI in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message if the UE is not registered for onboarding services in SNPN. If the UE has set the ER-NSSAI bit to "Extended rejected NSSAI supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, the rejected NSSAI shall be included in the Extended rejected NSSAI IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message; otherwise the rejected NSSAI shall be included in the Rejected NSSAI IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. If the UE is registered for onboarding services in SNPN, the AMF shall not include rejected NSSAI in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

If the UE has set the ER-NSSAI bit to "Extended rejected NSSAI supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, the rejected NSSAI contains S-NSSAI(s) which was included in the requested NSSAI but rejected by the network associated with rejection cause(s); otherwise the rejected NSSAI contains S-NSSAI(s) which was included in the requested NSSAI but rejected by the network associated with rejection cause(s) with the following restrictions:

a) rejected NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN shall not include an S-NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN which is associated to multiple mapped S-NSSAIs and some of these but not all mapped S-NSSAIs are not allowed; and

b) rejected NSSAI for the current registration area shall not include an S-NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN which is associated to multiple mapped S-NSSAIs and some of these but not all mapped S-NSSAIs are not allowed.

NOTE9: The UE that does not support extended rejected NSSAI can avoid requesting an S-NSSAI associated with a mapped S-NSSAI, which was included in the previous requested NSSAI but neither in the allowed NSSAI nor in the rejected NSSAI in the consequent registration procedures.

If the UE indicated the support for network slice-specific authentication and authorization, and if the requested NSSAI (i.e. the Requested NSSAI IE or the Requested mapped NSSAI IE) includes one or more S-NSSAIs subject to network slice-specific authentication and authorization, the AMF shall in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message include:

a) the allowed NSSAI containing the S-NSSAI(s) or the mapped S-NSSAI(s), if any:

i) which are not subject to network slice-specific authentication and authorization and are allowed by the AMF; or

ii) for which the network slice-specific authentication and authorization has been successfully performed;

b) optionally, the rejected NSSAI;

c) pending NSSAI containing one or more S-NSSAIs for which network slice-specific authentication and authorization (except for re-NSSAA) will be performed or is ongoing, and one or more S-NSSAIs from the pending NSSAI which the AMF provided to the UE during the previous registration procedure for which network slice-specific authentication and authorization will be performed or is ongoing, if any; and

d) the "NSSAA to be performed" indicator in the 5GS registration result IE set to indicate that the network slice-specific authentication and authorization procedure will be performed by the network, if the allowed NSSAI is not included in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

If the UE is not registered for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE indicated the support for network slice-specific authentication and authorization, and:

a) the UE did not include the requested NSSAI in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message or none of the S-NSSAIs in the requested NSSAI in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message are allowed;

b) all default S-NSSAIs are subject to network slice-specific authentication and authorization; and

c) the network slice-specific authentication and authorization procedure has not been successfully performed for any of the default S-NSSAIs,

the AMF shall in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message include:

a) the "NSSAA to be performed" indicator in the 5GS registration result IE to indicate that the network slice-specific authentication and authorization procedure will be performed by the network; and

b) pending NSSAI containing one or more default S-NSSAIs for which network slice-specific authentication and authorization will be performed or is ongoing and one or more S-NSSAIs from the pending NSSAI which the AMF provided to the UE during the previous registration procedure for which network slice-specific authentication and authorization will be performed or is ongoing (if any); and

c) optionally, the rejected NSSAI.

If the UE is not registered for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE indicated the support for network slice-specific authentication and authorization, and:

a) the UE did not include the requested NSSAI in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message or none of the S-NSSAIs in the requested NSSAI in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message are allowed; and

b) one or more default S-NSSAIs are not subject to network slice-specific authentication and authorization or the network slice-specific authentication and authorization procedure has been successfully performed for one or more default S-NSSAIs;

the AMF shall in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message include:

a) pending NSSAI containing one or more default S-NSSAIs for which network slice-specific authentication and authorization will be performed or is ongoing (if any) and one or more S-NSSAIs from the pending NSSAI which the AMF provided to the UE during the previous registration procedure for which network slice-specific authentication and authorization will be performed or is ongoing (if any);

b) allowed NSSAI containing S-NSSAI(s) for the current PLMN or SNPN each of which corresponds to a default S-NSSAI which are not subject to network slice-specific authentication and authorization or for which the network slice-specific authentication and authorization has been successfully performed;

c) allowed NSSAI containing one or more default S-NSSAIs, as the mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the allowed NSSAI in roaming scenarios, which are not subject to network slice-specific authentication and authorization or for which the network slice-specific authentication and authorization has been successfully performed; and

d) optionally, the rejected NSSAI.

If the UE did not include the requested NSSAI in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message or none of the S-NSSAIs in the requested NSSAI in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message are allowed, the allowed NSSAI shall not contain default S-NSSAI(s) that are subject to NSAC. If the subscription information includes the NSSRG information, the S-NSSAIs of the allowed NSSAI shall be associated with at least one common NSSRG value.

When the REGISTRATION ACCEPT includes a pending NSSAI, the pending NSSAI shall contain all S-NSSAIs for which network slice-specific authentication and authorization (except for re-NSSAA) will be performed or is ongoing from the requested NSSAI of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message that was received over the 3GPP access, non-3GPP access, or both the 3GPP access and non-3GPP access.

If the UE supports extended rejected NSSAI and the AMF determines that maximum number of UEs reached for all S-NSSAIs in the requested NSSAI as specified in subclause4.6.2.5, the AMF shall include the rejected NSSAI containing one or more S-NSSAIs with the rejection cause "S-NSSAI not available due to maximum number of UEs reached" in the Extended rejected NSSAI IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. In addition, the AMF may include a back-off timer value for each S-NSSAI with the rejection cause "S-NSSAI not available due to maximum number of UEs reached" included in the Extended rejected NSSAI IE of the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. To avoid that large numbers of UEs simultaneously initiate deferred requests, the network should select the value for the backoff  timer for each S-NSSAI for the informed UEs so that timeouts are not synchronised.

If the UE does not indicate support for extended rejected NSSAI and the maximum number of UEs has been reached, the AMF should include the rejected NSSAI containing one or more S-NSSAIs with the rejection cause "S-NSSAI not available in the current registration area" in the Rejected NSSAI IE and should not include these S-NSSAIs in the allowed NSSAI in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

NOTE10: Based on network policies, the AMF can include the S-NSSAI(s) for which the maximum number of UEs has been reached in the rejected NSSAI with rejection causes other than "S-NSSAI not available in the current registration area".

The AMF may include a new configured NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message if:

a) the REGISTRATION REQUEST message did not include a requested NSSAI and the UE is not registered for onboarding services in SNPN;

b) the REGISTRATION REQUEST message included a requested NSSAI containing an S-NSSAI that is not valid in the serving PLMN or SNPN;

c) the REGISTRATION REQUEST message included a requested NSSAI containing an S-NSSAI with incorrect mapped S-NSSAI(s);

d) the REGISTRATION REQUEST message included the Network slicing indication IE with the Default configured NSSAI indication bit set to "Requested NSSAI created from default configured NSSAI";

e) the REGISTRATION REQUEST message included the requested mapped NSSAI; 

f) the S-NSSAIs of the requested NSSAI in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message are not associated with any common NSSRG value, except for the case that the AMF, based on the indication received from the UDM as specified in 3GPPTS23.501[8], has provided all subscribed S-NSSAIs in the configured NSSAI to a UE who does not support NSSRG; or

NOTE11: If the S-NSSAIs of the requested NSSAI in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message are not associated with any common NSSRG value, it is possible that at least one of the S-NSSAIs is not included in any of new allowed NSSAI, new (extended) rejected NSSAI (if applicable), and new pending NSSAI (if applicable).

g) the S-NSSAIs of the requested NSSAI in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message over the current access and the allowed NSSAI over the other access are not associated with any common NSSRG value.

If a new configured NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN is included, the AMF shall also include the mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the configured NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN if available in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. In this case the AMF shall start timer T3550 and enter state 5GMM-COMMON-PROCEDURE-INITIATED as described in subclause5.1.3.2.3.3.

If a new configured NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN is included, the subscription information includes the NSSRG information, and the NSSRG bit in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message is set to:

a) "NSSRG supported", then the AMF shall include the NSSRG information in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message; or

b) "NSSRG not supported", then the configured NSSAI shall include S-NSSAIs each of which is associated with all the NSSRG value(s) of the default S-NSSAI(s), or the configured NSSAI shall include, based on the indication received from the UDM as specified in 3GPPTS23.501[8], all subscribed S-NSSAIs even if these S-NSSAIs do not share any common NSSRG value.

The AMF shall include the Network slicing indication IE with the Network slicing subscription change indication set to "Network slicing subscription changed" in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message if the UDM has indicated that the subscription data for network slicing has changed. In this case the AMF shall start timer T3550 and enter state 5GMM-COMMON-PROCEDURE-INITIATED as described in subclause5.1.3.2.3.3.

If the S-NSSAI(s) associated with the existing PDU session(s) of the UE is not included in the requested NSSAI (i.e. Requested NSSAI IE or Requested mapped NSSAI IE) of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, the AMF shall perform a local release of the PDU session(s) associated with the S-NSSAI(s) except for a PDU session associated with DNN and S-NSSAI in the AMF onboarding configuration data and shall request the SMF to perform a local release of those PDU session(s).

The UE that has indicated the support for network slice-specific authentication and authorization receiving the pending NSSAI in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message shall store the S-NSSAI(s) in the pending NSSAI as specified in subclause4.6.2.2. If the registration area contains TAIs belonging to different PLMNs, which are equivalent PLMNs, the UE shall store the received pending NSSAI for each of the equivalent PLMNs as specified in subclause4.6.2.2. If the pending NSSAI is not included in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message and the "NSSAA to be performed" indicator is not set to "Network slice-specific authentication and authorization is to be performed" in the 5GS registration result IE of the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message, then the UE shall delete the pending NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN and its equivalent PLMN(s), if existing, as specified in subclause4.6.2.2.

The UE receiving the rejected NSSAI in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message takes the following actions based on the rejection cause in the rejected S-NSSAI(s):

"S-NSSAI not available in the current PLMN or SNPN"

 The UE shall add the rejected S-NSSAI(s) in the rejected NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN as specified in subclause4.6.2.2 and shall not attempt to use this S-NSSAI(s) in the current PLMN or SNPN until switching off the UE, the UICC containing the USIM is removed, the entry of the "list of subscriber data" with the SNPN identity of the current SNPN is updated, or the rejected S-NSSAI(s) are removed or deleted as described in subclause4.6.2.2.

"S-NSSAI not available in the current registration area"

 The UE shall add the rejected S-NSSAI(s) in the rejected NSSAI for the current registration area as specified in subclause4.6.2.2 and shall not attempt to use this S-NSSAI(s) in the current registration area until switching off the UE, the UE moving out of the current registration area, the UICC containing the USIM is removed, the entry of the "list of subscriber data" with the SNPN identity of the current SNPN is updated, or the rejected S-NSSAI(s) are removed or deleted as described in subclause4.6.2.2.

"S-NSSAI not available due to the failed or revoked network slice-specific authentication and authorization"

 The UE shall store the rejected S-NSSAI(s) in the rejected NSSAI for the failed or revoked NSSAA as specified in subclause4.6.2.2 and shall not attempt to use this S-NSSAI in the current PLMN or SNPN over any access until switching off the UE, the UICC containing the USIM is removed, the entry of the "list of subscriber data" with the SNPN identity of the current SNPN is updated, or the rejected S-NSSAI(s) are removed or deleted as described in subclause4.6.1 and 4.6.2.2.

"S-NSSAI not available due to maximum number of UEs reached"

 Unless the back-off timer value received along with the S-NSSAI is zero, the UE shall add the rejected S-NSSAI(s) in the rejected NSSAI for the maximum number of UEs reached as specified in subclause4.6.2.2 and shall not attempt to use this S-NSSAI in the current PLMN over the current access until switching off the UE, the UICC containing the USIM is removed, the entry of the "list of subscriber data" with the SNPN identity of the current SNPN is updated, or the rejected S-NSSAI(s) are removed as described in subclause4.6.2.2.

NOTE12: If the back-off timer value received along with the S-NSSAI in the rejected NSSAI for the maximum number of UEs reached is zero as specified in subclause10.5.7.4a of TS24.008, the UE does not consider the S-NSSAI as the rejected S-NSSAI.

If there is one or more S-NSSAIs in the rejected NSSAI with the rejection cause "S-NSSAI not available due to maximum number of UEs reached", then for each S-NSSAI, the UE shall behave as follows:

a) stop the timer T3526 associated with the S-NSSAI, if running;

b) start the timer T3526 with:

1) the back-off timer value received along with the S-NSSAI, if a back-off timer value is received along with the S-NSSAI that is neither zero nor deactivated; or

2) an implementation specific back-off timer value, if no back-off timer value is received along with the S-NSSAI; and

c) remove the S-NSSAI from the rejected NSSAI for the maximum number of UEs reached when the timer T3526 associated with the S-NSSAI expires.

If the UE sets the NSSAA bit in the 5GMM capability IE to "Network slice-specific authentication and authorization not supported", and:

a) if the Requested NSSAI IE only includes the S-NSSAI(s) subject to network slice-specific authentication and authorization and one or more default S-NSSAIs (containing one or more S-NSSAIs each of which may be associated with a new S-NSSAI) which are not subject to network slice-specific authentication and authorization are available, the AMF shall in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message include:

1) the allowed NSSAI containing S-NSSAI(s) for the current PLMN or SNPN each of which corresponds to a default S-NSSAI which are not subject to network slice-specific authentication and authorization;

2) the allowed NSSAI containing the default S-NSSAIs, as the mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the allowed NSSAI in roaming scenarios, which are not subject to network slice-specific authentication and authorization; and

3) the rejected NSSAI containing the S-NSSAI(s) subject to network slice specific authentication and authorization with the rejection cause indicating "S-NSSAI not available in the current PLMN or SNPN", except if the UE has not set the ER-NSSAI bit to "Extended rejected NSSAI supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and the S-NSSAI(s) is associated to multiple mapped S-NSSAIs and some of these but not all mapped S-NSSAIs are subject to NSSAA; or

b) if the Requested NSSAI IE includes one or more S-NSSAIs subject to network slice-specific authentication and authorization, the AMF shall in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message include:

1) the allowed NSSAI containing the S-NSSAI(s) or the mapped S-NSSAI(s) which are not subject to network slice-specific authentication and authorization; and

2) the rejected NSSAI containing:

i) the S-NSSAI(s) subject to network slice specific authentication and authorization with the rejection cause indicating "S-NSSAI not available in the current PLMN or SNPN", except if the UE has not set the ER-NSSAI bit to "Extended rejected NSSAI supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and the S-NSSAI(s) is associated to multiple mapped S-NSSAIs and some of these but not all mapped S-NSSAIs are subject to NSSAA; and

ii) the S-NSSAI(s) which was included in the requested NSSAI but rejected by the network associated with the rejection cause indicating "S-NSSAI not available in the current PLMN or SNPN" or the rejection cause indicating "S-NSSAI not available in the current registration area", if any.

For a REGISTRATION REQUEST message with a 5GS registration type IE indicating "mobility registration updating", if the UE does not indicate support for network slice-specific authentication and authorization, the UE is not registered for onboarding services in SNPN, and:

a) the UE is not in NB-N1 mode; and

b) if:

1) the UE did not include the requested NSSAI in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message; or

2) none of the S-NSSAIs in the requested NSSAI in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message are allowed;

and one or more default S-NSSAIs which are not subject to network slice-specific authentication and authorization are available, the AMF shall:

a) put the allowed S-NSSAI(s) for the current PLMN or SNPN each of which corresponds to a default S-NSSAI and not subject to network slice-specific authentication and authorization in the allowed NSSAI of the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message;

b) put the default S-NSSAIs and not subject to network slice-specific authentication and authorization, as the mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the allowed NSSAI in roaming scenarios, in the allowed NSSAI of the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message; and

c) determine a registration area such that all S-NSSAIs of the allowed NSSAI are available in the registration area.

During a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update for which the 5GS registration type IE indicates:

a) "periodic registration updating"; or

b) "mobility registration updating" and the UE is in NB-N1 mode;

and the UE is not registered for onboarding services in SNPN, the AMF:

a) may provide a new allowed NSSAI to the UE;

b) shall provide a pending NSSAI to the UE if the UE has indicated the support for network slice-specific authentication and authorization and there are S-NSSAIs for which network slice-specific authentication and authorization (except for re-NSSAA) will be performed or is ongoing for the current PLMN or SNPN; or

c) may provide both a new allowed NSSAI and a pending NSSAI to the UE;

in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. Additionally, if a pending NSSAI is provided without an allowed NSSAI and no S-NSSAI is currently allowed for the UE, the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message shall include the 5GS registration result IE with the "NSSAA to be performed" indicator set to "Network slice-specific authentication and authorization is to be performed".

If the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message contains the Network slicing indication IE with the Network slicing subscription change indication set to "Network slicing subscription changed", the UE shall delete the network slicing information for each and every PLMN except for the current PLMN as specified in subclause4.6.2.2.

If the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message contains the allowed NSSAI, then the UE shall store the included allowed NSSAI together with the PLMN identity of the registered PLMN or the SNPN identity of the registered SNPN and the registration area as specified in subclause4.6.2.2. If the registration area contains TAIs belonging to different PLMNs, which are equivalent PLMNs, the UE shall store the received allowed NSSAI in each of allowed NSSAIs which are associated with each of the PLMNs.

For each of the PDU session(s) active in the UE:

- if the allowed NSSAI contains an HPLMN S-NSSAI (e.g. mapped S-NSSAI, if available) matching to the HPLMN S-NSSAI of the PDU session, the UE shall locally update the S-NSSAI associated with the PDU session to the corresponding S-NSSAI received in the allowed NSSAI; and

- if the allowed NSSAI does not contain an HPLMN S-NSSAI (e.g. mapped S-NSSAI, if available) matching to the HPLMN S-NSSAI of the PDU session, the UE may perform a local release of the PDU session except for an emergency PDU session, if any, and except for a PDU session established when the UE is registered for onboarding services in SNPN, if any.

NOTE13: According to 3GPPTS23.501[8], also the AMF will determine which PDU sessions can no longer be supported based on the new allowed NSSAI, and it will cause a release on the UE side either by indicating in the PDU session status IE which PDU sessions are inactive on the network side or by triggering the SMF to initiate a release via 5GSM signalling.

If the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message contains a configured NSSAI IE with a new configured NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN and optionally the mapped S-NSSAI(s) for the configured NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN, the UE shall store the contents of the configured NSSAI IE as specified in subclause4.6.2.2. In addition, if the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message contains an NSSRG information IE, the UE shall store the contents of the NSSRG information IE as specified in subclause4.6.2.2.

If the UE has set the NSAG bit to "NSAG supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, the AMF may include the NSAG information IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

If the UE receives the NSAG information IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message, the UE shall store the NSAG information as specified in subclause 4.6.2.2.

If the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message:

a) includes the 5GS registration result IE with the "NSSAA to be performed" indicator set to "Network slice-specific authentication and authorization is to be performed";

b) includes a pending NSSAI; and

c) does not include an allowed NSSAI;

the UE:

a) shall not perform the registration procedure for mobility and registration update with the Uplink data status IE except for emergency services;

b) shall not initiate a service request procedure except for emergency services, for responding to paging or notification over non-3GPP access, for cases f), i), m) and o) in subclause5.6.1.1;

c) shall not initiate a 5GSM procedure except for emergency services, indicating a change of 3GPP PS data off UE status, or to request the release of a PDU session; and

d) shall not initiate the NAS transport procedure except for sending a CIoT user data container, SMS, an LPP message, a location services message, an SOR transparent container, a UE policy container or a UE parameters update transparent container;

until the UE receives an allowed NSSAI.

During a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update for which the 5GS registration type IE indicates:

a) "mobility registration updating" and the UE is in NB-N1 mode; or

b) "periodic registration updating";

if the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message includes the 5GS registration result IE with the "NSSAA to be performed" indicator not set to "Network slice-specific authentication and authorization is to be performed" and the message does not contain an allowed NSSAI and no new allowed NSSAI, the UE shall consider the previously received allowed NSSAI as valid.

During a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update for which the 5GS registration type IE indicates:

a) "mobility registration updating"; or

b) "periodic registration updating";

if the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message includes the 5GS registration result IE with the "NSSAA to be performed" indicator set to "Network slice-specific authentication and authorization is to be performed" and the message contains a pending NSSAI, the UE shall delete any stored allowed NSSAI as specified in subclause4.6.2.2.

If the Uplink data status IE is included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message:

a) if the AMF determines that the UE is in non-allowed area or is not in allowed area, and the PDU session(s) indicated by the Uplink data status IE is non-emergency PDU session(s) or the UE is not configured for high priority access in selected PLMN, the AMF shall include the PDU session reactivation result IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message indicating that user-plane resources for the corresponding PDU session(s) cannot be re-established, and shall include the PDU session reactivation result error cause IE with the 5GMM cause set to #28 "Restricted service area";

b) otherwise, the AMF shall:

1) indicate the SMF to re-establish the user-plane resources for the corresponding PDU session;

2) include PDU session reactivation result IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message to indicate the user-plane resources re-establishment result of the PDU sessions for which the UE requested to re-establish the user-plane resources; and

3) determine the UE presence in LADN service area and forward the UE presence in LADN service area towards the SMF, if the corresponding PDU session is a PDU session for LADN.

If the Uplink data status IE is not included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and the REGISTRATION REQUEST message is sent for the trigger d) in subclause5.5.1.3.2, the AMF may indicate the SMF to re-establish the user-plane resources for the PDU sessions.

If a PDU session status IE is included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message:

a) for single access PDU sessions, the AMF shall:

1) perform a local release of all those PDU sessions which are not in 5GSM state PDU SESSION INACTIVE on the AMF side associated with the access type the REGISTRATION REQUEST message is sent over, but are indicated by the UE as being in 5GSM state PDU SESSION INACTIVE. If any of those PDU sessions is associated with one or more MBS sessions, the SMF shall consider the UE as removed from the associated MBS sessions; and

2) include a PDU session status IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message to indicate which PDU sessions associated with the access type the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message is sent over are not in 5GSM state PDU SESSION INACTIVE in the AMF; and

b) for MA PDU sessions:

1) for all those PDU sessions which are not in 5GSM state PDU SESSION INACTIVE and have user plane resources established on the access the REGISTRATION REQUEST message is sent over on the AMF side, but are indicated by the UE as no user plane resources established:

i) for PDU sessions having user plane resources established only on the access the REGISTRATION REQUEST message is sent over, the AMF shall perform a local release of all those PDU sessions. If the MA PDU session is associated with one or more MBS sessions, the SMF shall consider the UE as removed from the associated MBS sessions; and

ii) for PDU sessions having user plane resources established on both accesses, the AMF shall perform a local release on the user plane resources associated with the access type the REGISTRATION REQUEST message is sent over. If the REGISTRATION REQUEST message is sent over 3GPP access and the MA PDU session is associated with one or more MBS sessions, the SMF shall consider the UE as removed from the associated MBS sessions; and

2) the AMF shall include a PDU session status IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message to indicate which MA PDU sessions having user plane resources established on the AMF side on the access the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message is sent over.

If the Allowed PDU session status IE is included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, the AMF shall:

a) for a 5GSM message from each SMF that has indicated pending downlink signalling only, forward the received 5GSM message via 3GPP access to the UE after the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message is sent;

b) for each SMF that has indicated pending downlink data only:

1) notify the SMF that reactivation of the user-plane resources for the corresponding PDU session(s) associated with non-3GPP access cannot be performed if the corresponding PDU session ID(s) are not indicated in the Allowed PDU session status IE; and

2) notify the SMF that reactivation of the user-plane resources for the corresponding PDU session(s) associated with non-3GPP access can be performed if the corresponding PDU session ID(s) are indicated in the Allowed PDU session status IE.

c) for each SMF that have indicated pending downlink signalling and data:

1) notify the SMF that reactivation of the user-plane resources for the corresponding PDU session(s) associated with non-3GPP access cannot be performed if the corresponding PDU session ID(s) are not indicated in the Allowed PDU session status IE;

2) notify the SMF that reactivation of the user-plane resources for the corresponding PDU session(s) associated with non-3GPP access can be performed if the corresponding PDU session ID(s) are indicated in the Allowed PDU session status IE; and

3) discard the received 5GSM message for PDU session(s) associated with non-3GPP access; and

d) include the PDU session reactivation result IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message to indicate the successfully re-established user-plane resources for the corresponding PDU sessions, if any.

If the PDU session reactivation result IE is included in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message indicating that the user-plane resources have been successfully reactivated for a PDU session that was requested by the UE in the Allowed PDU session status IE, the UE considers the corresponding PDU session to be associated with the 3GPP access. If the user-plane resources of a PDU session have been successfully reactivated over the 3GPP access, the AMF and SMF update the associated access type of the corresponding PDU session.

If the PDU session reactivation result IE is included in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message indicating that the user-plane resources cannot be established for a PDU session that was requested by the UE in the Allowed PDU session status IE, the UE considers the corresponding PDU session to be associated with the non-3GPP access.

If an EPS bearer context status IE is included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, the AMF handles the received EPS bearer context status IE as specified in 3GPPTS23.502[9].

If the EPS bearer context status information is generated for the UE during the inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode as specified in 3GPPTS23.502[9] and the AMF supports N26 interface, the AMF shall include an EPS bearer context status IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message to indicate the UE which mapped EPS bearer contexts are active in the network.

If the user-plane resources cannot be established for a PDU session, the AMF shall include the PDU session reactivation result IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message indicating that user-plane resources for the corresponding PDU session cannot be re-established, and:

a) if the user-plane resources cannot be established because the SMF indicated to the AMF that the UE is located out of the LADN service area (see 3GPPTS29.502[20A]), the AMF shall include the PDU session reactivation result error cause IE with the 5GMM cause set to #43 "LADN not available";

b) if the user-plane resources cannot be established because the SMF indicated to the AMF that only prioritized services are allowed (see 3GPPTS29.502[20A]), the AMF shall include the PDU session reactivation result error cause IE with the 5GMM cause set to #28 "restricted service area";

c) if the user-plane resources cannot be established because the SMF indicated to the AMF that the resource is not available in the UPF (see 3GPPTS29.502[20A]), the AMF shall include the PDU session reactivation result error cause IE with the 5GMM cause set to #92 "insufficient user-plane resources for the PDU session";

d) if the user-plane resources cannot be established because the SMF indicated to the AMF that the S-NSSAI associated with the PDU session is unavailable due to NSAC (see 3GPPTS29.502[20A]), the AMF shall include the PDU session reactivation result error cause IE with the 5GMM cause set to #69 "insufficient resources for specific slice"; or

e) otherwise, the AMF may include the PDU session reactivation result error cause IE to indicate the cause of failure to re-establish the user-plane resources.

NOTE14: It is up to UE implementation when to re-send a request for user-plane re-establishment for the associated PDU session after receiving a PDU session reactivation result error cause IE with a 5GMM cause set to #92 "insufficient user-plane resources for the PDU session".

NOTE15: The UE can locally start a back-off timer after receiving a PDU session reactivation result error cause IE with a 5GMM cause set to #69 "insufficient resources for specific slice". The value of the back-off timer is up to UE implementation. Upon expiry of the back-off timer, the UE can re-send a request for user-plane re-establishment for the associated PDU session.

If the AMF needs to initiate PDU session status synchronization the AMF shall include a PDU session status IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message to indicate the UE:

- which single access PDU sessions associated with the access the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message is sent over are not in 5GSM state PDU SESSION INACTIVE in the AMF; and

- which MA PDU sessions are not in 5GSM state PDU SESSION INACTIVE and having user plane resources established in the AMF on the access the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message is sent over.

The AMF may include the LADN information IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message as described in subclause5.5.1.2.4. The UE, upon receiving the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message with the LADN information IE, shall delete its old LADN information (if any) and store the received new LADN information.

If the AMF does not include the LADN information IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message during registration procedure for mobility and registration update, the UE shall delete its old LADN information.

If the PDU session status IE is included in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message:

a) for single access PDU sessions, the UE shall perform a local release of all those PDU sessions associated with the access type the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message is sent over which are not in 5GSM state PDU SESSION INACTIVE or PDU SESSION ACTIVE PENDING on the UE side, but are indicated by the AMF as being in 5GSM state PDU SESSION INACTIVE. If a locally released PDU session is associated with one or more MBS sessions, the UE shall locally leave the associated MBS sessions; and

b) for MA PDU sessions, for all those PDU sessions which are not in 5GSM state PDU SESSION INACTIVE or PDU SESSION ACTIVE PENDING and have user plane resources established in the UE on the access the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message is sent over, but are indicated by the AMF as no user plane resources established:

1) for MA PDU sessions having user plane resources established only on the access the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message is sent over, the UE shall perform a local release of those MA PDU sessions. If a locally released MA PDU session is associated with one or more MBS sessions, the UE shall locally leave the associated MBS sessions; and

2) for MA PDU sessions having user plane resources established on both accesses, the UE shall perform a local release on the user plane resources on the access the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message is sent over. If the user plane resources over 3GPP access are released and the MA PDU session is associated with one or more MBS sessions, the UE shall locally leave the associated MBS sessions.

If:

a) the UE included a PDU session status IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message;

b) the UE is operating in the single-registration mode;

c) the UE is performing inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode in 5GMM-IDLE mode; and

d) the UE has received the IWK N26 bit set to "interworking without N26 interface supported";

the UE shall ignore the PDU session status IE if received in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

If the EPS bearer context status IE is included in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message, the UE shall locally delete all those QoS flow descriptions and all associated QoS rules, if any, which are associated with inactive EPS bearer contexts as indicated by the AMF in the EPS bearer context status IE.

If the UE included S1 mode supported indication in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, the AMF supporting inter-system change with EPS shall set the IWK N26 bit to either:

a) "interworking without N26 interface not supported" if the AMF supports N26 interface; or

b) "interworking without N26 interface supported" if the AMF does not support N26 interface

in the 5GS network feature support IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

The UE supporting S1 mode shall operate in the mode for inter-system interworking with EPS as follows:

a) if the IWK N26 bit in the 5GS network feature support IE is set to "interworking without N26 interface not supported", the UE shall operate in single-registration mode;

b) if the IWK N26 bit in the 5GS network feature support IE is set to "interworking without N26 interface supported" and the UE supports dual-registration mode, the UE may operate in dual-registration mode; or

NOTE16: The registration mode used by the UE is implementation dependent.

c) if the IWK N26 bit in the 5GS network feature support IE is set to "interworking without N26 interface supported" and the UE only supports single-registration mode, the UE shall operate in single-registration mode.

The UE shall treat the received interworking without N26 interface indicator for inter-system change with EPS as valid in the entire PLMN and its equivalent PLMN(s).

The network informs the UE about the support of specific features, such as IMS voice over PS session, location services (5G-LCS), emergency services, emergency services fallback and ATSSS, in the 5GS network feature support information element. In a UE with IMS voice over PS session capability, the IMS voice over PS session indicator, Emergency services support indicator and Emergency services fallback indicator shall be provided to the upper layers. The upper layers take the IMS voice over PS session indicator into account when selecting the access domain for voice sessions or calls. When initiating an emergency call, the upper layers take the IMS voice over PS session indicator, Emergency services support indicator and Emergency services fallback indicator into account for the access domain selection. When the UE determines via the IMS voice over PS session indicator that the network does not support IMS voice over PS sessions in N1 mode, then the UE shall not perform a local release of any persistent PDU session if the AMF does not indicate that the PDU session is in 5GSM state PDU SESSION INACTIVE via the PDU session status IE. When the UE determines via the Emergency services support indicator that the network does not support emergency services in N1 mode, then the UE shall not perform a local release of any emergency PDU session if user-plane resources associated with that emergency PDU session are established if the AMF does not indicate that the PDU session is in 5GSM state PDU SESSION INACTIVE via the PDU session status IE. In a UE with LCS capability, location services indicators (5G-LCS) shall be provided to the upper layers. In a UE with the capability for ATSSS, the network support for ATSSS shall be provided to the upper layers. If the UE receives the 5GS network feature support IE with the ATSSS support indicator set to "ATSSS not supported", the UE shall perform a local release of the MA PDU session, if any. If a locally released MA PDU session is associated with one or more MBS sessions, the UE shall locally leave the associated MBS sessions.

The AMF shall set the EMF bit in the 5GS network feature support IE to:

a) "Emergency services fallback supported in NR connected to 5GCN and E-UTRA connected to 5GCN" if the network supports the emergency services fallback procedure when the UE is in an NR cell connected to 5GCN or an E-UTRA cell connected to 5GCN;

b) "Emergency services fallback supported in NR connected to 5GCN only" if the network supports the emergency services fallback procedure when the UE is in an NR cell connected to 5GCN and does not support the emergency services fallback procedure when the UE is in an E-UTRA cell connected to 5GCN;

c) "Emergency services fallback supported in E-UTRA connected to 5GCN only" if the network supports the emergency services fallback procedure when the UE is in an E-UTRA cell connected to 5GCN and does not support the emergency services fallback procedure when the UE is in an NR cell connected to 5GCN; or

d) "Emergency services fallback not supported" if network does not support the emergency services fallback procedure when the UE is in any cell connected to 5GCN.

NOTE17: If the emergency services are supported in neither the EPS nor the 5GS homogeneously, based onoperator policy, the AMF will set the EMF bit in the 5GS network feature support IE to "Emergency services fallback not supported".

NOTE18: Even though the AMF's support of emergency services fallback is indicated per RAT, the UE's support of emergency services fallback is not per RAT, i.e. the UE's support of emergency services fallback is the same for both NR connected to 5GCN and E-UTRA connected to 5GCN.

If the UE is not operating in SNPN access operation mode:

a) the network informs the UE that the use of access identity 1 is valid in the RPLMN or equivalent PLMN by setting the MPS indicator bit of the 5GS network feature support IE to "Access identity 1 valid", in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. Based on operator policy, the AMF sets the MPS indicator bit in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message based on the MPS priority information in the user's subscription context obtained from the UDM;

b) upon receiving a REGISTRATION ACCEPT message with the MPS indicator bit set to "Access identity 1 valid", the UE shall act as a UE with access identity 1 configured for MPS as described in subclause4.5.2, in all NG-RAN of the registered PLMN and its equivalent PLMNs. The MPS indicator bit in the 5GS network feature support IE provided in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message is valid until the UE receives a REGISTRATION ACCEPT message with the MPS indicator bit set to "Access identity 1 not valid" or until the UE selects a non-equivalent PLMN. Access identity 1 is only applicable while the UE is in N1 mode;

c) during ongoing active PDU sessions that were set up relying on the MPS indicator bit being set to "Access identity 1 valid", if the network indicates in a registration update that the MPS indicator bit is reset to "Access identity 1 not valid", then the UE shall no longer act as a UE with access identity 1 configured for MPS as described in subclause4.5.2 unless the USIM contains a valid configuration for access identity 1 in RPLMN or equivalent PLMN. In the UE, the ongoing active PDU sessions are not affected by the change of the MPS indicator bit;

d) the network informs the UE that the use of access identity 2 is valid in the RPLMN or equivalent PLMN by setting the MCS indicator bit of the 5GS network feature support IE to "Access identity 2 valid", in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. Based on operator policy, the AMF sets the MCS indicator bit in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message based on the MCS priority information in the user's subscription context obtained from the UDM;

e) upon receiving a REGISTRATION ACCEPT message with the MCS indicator bit set to "Access identity 2 valid", the UE shall act as a UE with access identity 2 configured for MCS as described in subclause4.5.2, in all NG-RAN of the registered PLMN and its equivalent PLMNs. The MCS indicator bit in the 5GS network feature support IE provided in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message is valid until the UE receives a REGISTRATION ACCEPT message with the MCS indicator bit set to "Access identity 2 not valid" or until the UE selects a non-equivalent PLMN. Access identity 2 is only applicable while the UE is in N1 mode; and

f) during ongoing active PDU sessions that were set up relying on the MCS indicator bit being set to "Access identity 2 valid", if the network indicates in a registration update that the MCS indicator bit is reset to "Access identity 2 not valid", then the UE shall no longer act as a UE with access identity 2 configured for MCS as described in subclause4.5.2 unless the USIM contains a valid configuration for access identity 2 in RPLMN or equivalent PLMN. In the UE, the ongoing active PDU sessions are not affected by the change of the MCS indicator bit.

If the UE indicates support for restriction on use of enhanced coverage in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and:

a) in WB-N1 mode, the AMF decides to restrict the use of CE mode B for the UE, then the AMF shall set the RestrictEC bit to "CE mode B is restricted";

b) in WB-N1 mode, the AMF decides to restrict the use of both CE mode A and CE mode B for the UE, then the AMF shall set the RestrictEC bit to " Both CE mode A and CE mode B are restricted"; or

c) in NB-N1 mode, the AMF decides to restrict the use of enhanced coverage for the UE, then the AMF shall set the RestrictEC bit to "Use of enhanced coverage is restricted",

in the 5GS network feature support IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

If the UE is operating in SNPN access operation mode:

a) the network informs the UE that the use of access identity 1 is valid in the RSNPN by setting the MPS indicator bit of the 5GS network feature support IE to "Access identity 1 valid", in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. Based on operator policy, the AMF sets the MPS indicator bit in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message based on the MPS priority information in the user's subscription context obtained from the UDM;

b) upon receiving a REGISTRATION ACCEPT message with the MPS indicator bit set to "Access identity 1 valid", the UE shall act as a UE with access identity 1 configured for MPS as described in subclause4.5.2A, in all NG-RAN of the registered SNPN. The MPS indicator bit in the 5GS network feature support IE provided in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message is valid until the UE receives a REGISTRATION ACCEPT message with the MPS indicator bit set to "Access identity 1 not valid" or until the UE selects another SNPN. Access identity 1 is only applicable while the UE is in N1 mode;

c) during ongoing active PDU sessions that were set up relying on the MPS indicator bit being set to "Access identity 1 valid", if the network indicates in a registration update that the MPS indicator bit is reset to "Access identity 1 not valid", then the UE shall no longer act as a UE with access identity 1 configured for MPS as described in subclause4.5.2A unless the unified access control configuration in the "list of subscriber data" stored in the ME (see 3GPPTS23.122[5]) indicates the UE is configured for access identity 1 in the RSNPN. In the UE, the ongoing active PDU sessions are not affected by the change of the MPS indicator bit;

d) the network informs the UE that the use of access identity 2 is valid in the RSNPN by setting the MCS indicator bit of the 5GS network feature support IE to "Access identity 2 valid", in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. Based on operator policy, the AMF sets the MCS indicator bit in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message based on the MCS priority information in the user's subscription context obtained from the UDM;

e) upon receiving a REGISTRATION ACCEPT message with the MCS indicator bit set to "Access identity 2 valid", the UE shall act as a UE with access identity 2 configured for MCS as described in subclause4.5.2A, in all NG-RAN of the registered SNPN. The MCS indicator bit in the 5GS network feature support IE provided in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message is valid until the UE receives a REGISTRATION ACCEPT message with the MCS indicator bit set to "Access identity 2 not valid" or until the UE selects another SNPN. Access identity 2 is only applicable while the UE is in N1 mode; and

f) during ongoing active PDU sessions that were set up relying on the MCS indicator bit being set to "Access identity 2 valid", if the network indicates in a registration update that the MCS indicator bit is reset to "Access identity 2 not valid", then the UE shall no longer act as a UE with access identity 2 configured for MCS as described in subclause4.5.2A unless the unified access control configuration in the "list of subscriber data" stored in the ME (see 3GPPTS23.122[5]) indicates the UE is configured for access identity 2 in the RSNPN. In the UE, the ongoing active PDU sessions are not affected by the change of the MCS indicator bit.

If the UE has set the Follow-on request indicator to "Follow-on request pending" in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, or the network has downlink signalling pending, the AMF shall not immediately release the NAS signalling connection after the completion of the registration procedure.

If the UE is authorized to use V2X communication over PC5 reference point based on:

a) at least one of the following bits in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message set by the UE, or already stored in the 5GMM context in the AMF during the previous registration procedure as follows:

1) the V2XCEPC5 bit to "V2X communication over E-UTRA-PC5 supported"; or

2) the V2XCNPC5 bit to "V2X communication over NR-PC5 supported"; and

b) the user's subscription context obtained from the UDM as defined in 3GPPTS23.287[6C];

the AMF should not immediately release the NAS signalling connection after the completion of the registration procedure.

If the UE is authorized to use ProSe services based on:

a) at least one of the following bits in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message set by the UE, or already stored in the 5GMM context in the AMF during the previous registration procedure as follows:

1) the ProSe direct discovery bit to " ProSe direct discovery supported"; or

2) the ProSe direct communication bit to "ProSe direct communication supported"; and

b) the user's subscription context obtained from the UDM as defined in 3GPPTS23.304[6E];

the AMF should not immediately release the NAS signalling connection after the completion of the registration procedure.

If the Requested DRX parameters IE was included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, the AMF shall include the Negotiated DRX parameters IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. The AMF may set the Negotiated DRX parameters IE based on the received Requested DRX parameters IE and operator policy if available.

If the Requested NB-N1 mode DRX parameters IE was included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, the AMF shall include the Negotiated NB-N1 mode DRX parameters IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. The AMF may set the Negotiated NB-N1 mode DRX parameters IE based on the received Requested NB-N1 mode DRX parameters IE and operator policy if available.

The AMF shall include the Negotiated extended DRX parameters IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message only if the Requested extended DRX parameters IE was included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, and the AMF supports and accepts the use of eDRX. The AMF may set the Negotiated extended DRX parameters IE based on the received Requested extended DRX parameters IE, operator policy, information from NG-RAN and the user's subscription context obtained from the UDM if available.

If the UE included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message the UE status IE with the EMM registration status set to "UE is in EMM-REGISTERED state" and the AMF does not support N26 interface, the AMF shall operate as described in subclause5.5.1.2.4.

If the UE has indicated support for service gap control in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, a service gap time value is available in the 5GMM context, the AMF may include the T3447 value IE set to the service gap time value in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

If the UE requests ciphering keys for ciphered broadcast assistance data in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and the AMF has valid ciphering key data applicable to the UE's subscription and current tracking area, then the AMF shall include the ciphering key data in the Ciphering key data IE of the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

If the UE supports WUS assistance information and the AMF supports and accepts the use of WUS assistance information for the UE, then the AMF shall determine the negotiated UE paging probability information for the UE, store it in the 5GMM context of the UE, and if the UE does not have an active emergency PDU session, the AMF shall include it in the Negotiated WUS assistance information IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. The AMF may consider the UE paging probability information received in the Requested WUS assistance information IE when determining the negotiated UE paging probability information for the UE.

NOTE19: Besides the UE paging probability information requested by the UE, the AMF can take local configuration or previous statistical information for the UE into account when determining the negotiated UE paging probability information for the UE.

If the UE sets the NR-PSSI bit to "NR paging subgrouping supported" in the 5GMM capability IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and the AMF supports and accepts the use of PEIPS assistance information for the UE, then the AMF shall determine the Paging subgroup ID for the UE, store it in the 5GMM context of the UE, and include it in the Negotiated PEIPS assistance information IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message or in the Updated PEIPS assistance information IE in the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message as part of the registration procedure. The AMF may consider the UE paging probability information received in the Requested PEIPS assistance information IE when determining the Paging subgroup ID for the UE.

NOTE20: Besides the UE paging probability information when provided by the UE, the AMF can also take local configuration, whether the UE is likely to receive IMS voice over PS session calls, UE mobility pattern or previous statistical information for the UE or information provided by the NG-RAN into account when determining the Paging subgroup ID for the UE.

If due to regional subscription restrictions or access restrictions the UE is not allowed to access the TA or due to CAG restrictions the UE is not allowed to access the cell, but the UE has an emergency PDU session established, the AMF may accept the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and indicate to the SMF to perform a local release of all non-emergency PDU sessions (associated with 3GPP access if it is due to CAG restrictions) and informs the UE via the PDU session status IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. The AMF shall not indicate to the SMF to release the emergency PDU session. If the AMF indicated to the SMF to perform a local release of all non-emergency PDU sessions (associated with 3GPP access if it is due to CAG restrictions), the network shall behave as if the UE is registered for emergency services and shall set the 5GS registration result IE value to "Registered for emergency services" in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

If the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message includes the PDU session reactivation result error cause IE with the 5GMM cause set to #28 "Restricted service area", the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.NON-ALLOWED-SERVICE and behave as specified in subclause5.3.5.

If the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message includes the SOR transparent container IE and:

a) the SOR transparent container IE does not successfully pass the integrity check (see 3GPPTS33.501[24]); and

b) if the UE attempts obtaining service on another PLMNs or SNPNs as specified in 3GPPTS23.122[5] annexC;

then the UE shall release locally the established NAS signalling connection after sending a REGISTRATION COMPLETE message.

If the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message includes the SOR transparent container IE and the SOR transparent container IE successfully passes the integrity check (see 3GPPTS33.501[24]), the ME shall store the received SOR counter as specified in annexC and proceed as follows:

a) the UE shall proceed with the behaviour as specified in 3GPPTS23.122[5] annexC; and

b) if the registration procedure is performed over 3GPP access and the UE attempts obtaining service on another PLMNs or SNPNs as specified in 3GPPTS23.122[5] annexC then the UE may release locally the established NAS signalling connection after sending a REGISTRATION COMPLETE message. Otherwise the UE shall send a REGISTRATION COMPLETE message and not release the current N1 NAS signalling connection locally. If an acknowledgement is requested in the SOR transparent container IE of the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message, the UE acknowledgement is included in the SOR transparent container IE of the REGISTRATION COMPLETE message. In the SOR transparent container IE carrying the acknowledgement, the UE shall set the ME support of SOR-CMCI indicator to "SOR-CMCI supported by the ME".. Additionally, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder and the UE is not operating in SNPN access operation mode, the UE may set the ME support of SOR-SNPN-SI indicator to "SOR-SNPN-SI supported by the ME".

If the SOR transparent container IE successfully passes the integrity check (see 3GPPTS33.501[24]) , and:

a) the SOR transparent container IE indicates a list of preferred PLMN/access technology combinations is provided and the list type indicates "PLMN ID and access technology list", then the ME shall replace the highest priority entries in the "Operator Controlled PLMN Selector with Access Technology" list stored in the ME and shall proceed with the behaviour as specified in 3GPPTS23.122[5] annexC.

 If the SOR-CMCI is present and the Store SOR-CMCI in ME indicator is set to "Store SOR-CMCI in ME" then the UE shall store or delete the SOR-CMCI in the non-volatile memory of the ME as described in annexC.1;

b) the list type indicates "secured packet", then the ME shall behave as if a SMS is received with protocol identifier set to SIM data download, data coding scheme set to class 2 message and SMS payload as secured packet contents of SOR transparent container IE. The SMS payload is forwarded to UICC as specified in 3GPPTS23.040[4A]; or

c) the SOR transparent container IE indicates "HPLMN indication that 'no change of the "Operator Controlled PLMN Selector with Access Technology" list stored in the UE is needed and thus no list of preferred PLMN/access technology combinations is provided'", the UE operates in SNPN access operation mode and the SOR transparent container IE includes SOR-SNPN-SI, the ME shall replace SOR-SNPN-SI of the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or associated with the selected PLMN subscription, as specified in 3GPPTS23.122[5] with the received SOR-SNPN-SI.

 If the SOR-CMCI is present and the Store SOR-CMCI in ME indicator is set to "Store SOR-CMCI in ME" then the UE shall store or delete the SOR-CMCI in the non-volatile memory of the ME as described in annexC.1;

and the UE shall proceed with the behaviour as specified in 3GPPTS23.122[5]annexC.

If the SOR transparent container IE does not pass the integrity check successfully, then the UE shall discard the content of the SOR transparent container IE.

If required by operator policy, the AMF shall include the NSSAI inclusion mode IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message (see table4.6.2.3.1 of subclause4.6.2.3). Upon receipt of the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message:

a) if the message includes the NSSAI inclusion mode IE, the UE shall operate in the NSSAI inclusion mode indicated in the NSSAI inclusion mode IE over the current access within the current PLMN or SNPN and its equivalent PLMN(s), if any, in the current registration area; or

b) otherwise:

1) if the UE has NSSAI inclusion mode for the current PLMN or SNPN and access type stored in the UE, the UE shall operate in the stored NSSAI inclusion mode;

2) if the UE does not have NSSAI inclusion mode for the current PLMN or SNPN and the access type stored in the UE and if the UE is performing the registration procedure over:

i) 3GPP access, the UE shall operate in NSSAI inclusion modeD in the current PLMN or SNPN and the current access type;

ii) untrusted non-3GPP access, the UE shall operate in NSSAI inclusion modeC in the current PLMN and the current access type; or

iii) trusted non-3GPP access, the UE shall operate in NSSAI inclusion modeD in the current PLMN and the current access type; or

3) if the 5G-RG does not have NSSAI inclusion mode for the current PLMN and wireline access stored in the 5G-RG, and the 5G-RG is performing the registration procedure over wireline access, the 5G-RG shall operate in NSSAI inclusion modeB in the current PLMN and the current access type.

The AMF may include operator-defined access category definitions in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

If there is a running T3447 timer in the AMF and the Uplink data status IE is included or the Follow-on request indicator is set to "Follow-on request pending" in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, the AMF shall ignore the Uplink data status IE or that the Follow-on request indicator is set to "Follow-on request pending" and proceed as if the Uplink data status IE was not received or the Follow-on request indicator was not set to "Follow-on request pending" except for the following case:

- the PDU session(s) indicated by the Uplink data status IE is emergency PDU session(s);

- the UE is configured for high priority access in selected PLMN;

- the REGISTRATION REQUEST message is as a paging response; or

- the UE is establishing an emergency PDU session or performing emergency services fallback.

If the UE receives Operator-defined access category definitions IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message and the Operator-defined access category definitions IE contains one or more operator-defined access category definitions, the UE shall delete any operator-defined access category definitions stored for the RPLMN and shall store the received operator-defined access category definitions for the RPLMN. If the UE receives the Operator-defined access category definitions IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message and the Operator-defined access category definitions IE contains no operator-defined access category definitions, the UE shall delete any operator-defined access category definitions stored for the RPLMN. If the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message does not contain the Operator-defined access category definitions IE, the UE shall not delete the operator-defined access category definitions stored for the RPLMN.

If the UE has indicated support for service gap control in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and:

- the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message contains the T3447 value IE, then the UE shall store the new T3447 value, erase any previous stored T3447 value if exists and use the new T3447 value with the timer T3447 next time it is started; or

- the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message does not contain the T3447 value IE, then the UE shall erase any previous stored T3447 value if exists and stop the timer T3447 if running.

If the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message contains the Truncated 5G-S-TMSI configuration IE, then the UE shall store the included truncated 5G-S-TMSI configuration and return a REGISTRATION COMPLETE message to the AMF to acknowledge reception of the truncated 5G-S-TMSI configuration.

NOTE21: The UE provides the truncated 5G-S-TMSI configuration to the lower layers.

If the UE is not in NB-N1 mode, the UE has set the RACS bit to "RACS supported" in the 5GMM Capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, and the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message includes:

a) a UE radio capability ID deletion indication IE set to "Network-assigned UE radio capability IDs deletion requested", the UE shall delete any network-assigned UE radio capability IDs associated with the RPLMN or RSNPN and, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription stored at the UE, then the UE shall initiate a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update as specified in subclause5.5.1.3.2 over the existing N1 NAS signalling connection; or

b) a UE radio capability ID IE, the UE shall store the UE radio capability ID as specified in annexC.

If the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update was initiated and there is a request from the upper layers to perform "emergency services fallback" pending, the UE shall restart the service request procedure after the successful completion of the mobility and periodic registration update.

When AMF re-allocation occurs in the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update, if the new AMF receives in the 5GMM context of the UE the indication that the UE is registered for onboarding services in SNPN, the new AMF may start an implementation specific timer for onboarding services when the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update is successfully completed.

If the UE has included the service-level device ID set to the CAA-level UAV ID in the Service-level-AA container IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message contains the service-level-AA pending indication in the Service-level-AA container IE, the UE shall return a REGISTRATION COMPLETE message to the AMF to acknowledge reception of the service-level-AA pending indication, and the UE shall not attempt to perform another registration procedure for UAS services until the UUAA-MM procedure is completed, or to establish a PDU session for USS communication or a PDU session for C2 communication until the UUAA-MM procedure is completed successfully.

If the UE has included the service-level device ID set to the CAA-level UAV ID in the Service-level-AA container IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message does not contain the service-level-AA pending indication in the Service-level-AA container IE, the UE shall consider the UUAA-MM procedure is not triggered.

If the UE is registered for onboarding services in SNPN or the network determines that the UE's subscription only allows for configuration of SNPN subscription parameters in PLMN via the user plane, the AMF may start an implementation specific timer for onboarding services, if not running already, when the network considers that the UE is in 5GMM-REGISTERED (i.e. the network receives the REGISTRATION COMPLETE message from UE).

NOTE22: If the AMF considers that the UE is in 5GMM-IDLE, when the implementation specific timer for onboarding services expires and the network considers that the UE is still in state 5GMM-REGISTERED, the AMF can locally de-register the UE; or if the UE is in 5GMM-CONNECTED, the AMF can initiate the network-initiated de-registration procedure (see subclause 5.5.2.3).

NOTE23: The value of the implementation specific timer for onboarding services needs to be large enough to allow a UE to complete the configuration of one or more entries of the "list of subscriber data" taking into consideration that configuration of SNPN subscription parameters in PLMN via the user plane or onboarding services in SNPN involves third party entities outside of the operator's network.

If the UE receives the List of PLMNs to be used in disaster condition IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message and the UE supports MINT, the UE shall delete the "list of PLMN(s) to be used in disaster condition" stored in the ME together with the PLMN ID of the RPLMN, if any, and may store the "list of PLMN(s) to be used in disaster condition" included in the List of PLMNs to be used in disaster condition IE in the ME together with the PLMN ID of the RPLMN.

If the UE receives the Disaster roaming wait range IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message and the UE supports MINT, the UE shall delete the disaster roaming wait range stored in the ME, if any, and store the disaster roaming wait range included in the Disaster roaming wait range IE in the ME.

If the UE receives the Disaster return wait range IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message and the UE supports MINT, the UE shall delete the disaster return wait range stored in the ME, if any, and store the disaster return wait range stored included in the Disaster return wait range IE in the ME.

If the 5GS registration type IE is set to "disaster roaming mobility registration updating" and:

a) the MS determined PLMN with disaster condition IE is included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, the AMF shall determine the PLMN with disaster condition in the MS determined PLMN with disaster condition IE;

b) the MS determined PLMN with disaster condition IE is not included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and the Additional GUTI IE is included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and contains 5G-GUTI of a PLMN of the country of the PLMN providing disaster roaming, the AMF shall determine the PLMN with disaster condition in the PLMN identity of the 5G-GUTI;

c) the MS determined PLMN with disaster condition IE and the Additional GUTI IE are not included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and:

1) the 5GS mobile identity IE contains 5G-GUTI of a PLMN of the country of the PLMN providing disaster roaming, the AMF shall determine the PLMN with disaster condition in the PLMN identity of the 5G-GUTI; or

2) the 5GS mobile identity IE contains SUCI of a PLMN of the country of the PLMN providing disaster roaming, the AMF shall determine the PLMN with disaster condition in the PLMN identity of the SUCI; or

d) the MS determined PLMN with disaster condition IE is not included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, NG-RAN of the PLMN providing disaster roaming broadcasts disaster roaming indication and:

- the Additional GUTI IE is included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and contains 5G-GUTI of a PLMN of a country other than the country of the PLMN providing disaster roaming; or

- the Additional GUTI IE  is not included and the 5GS mobile identity IE contains 5G-GUTI or SUCI of a PLMN of a country other than the country of the PLMN providing disaster roaming;

 the AMF shall determine the PLMN with disaster condition based on the disaster roaming agreement arrangement between mobile network operators.

NOTE24: The disaster roaming agreement arrangement between mobile network operators is out scope of 3GPP.

If the AMF determines that a disaster condition applies to the PLMN with disaster condition, and the UE is allowed to be registered for disaster roaming services, the AMF shall set the Disaster roaming registration result value bit in the 5GS registration result IE to "no additional information" in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. If the AMF determines that the UE can be registered to the PLMN for normal service, the AMF shall set the Disaster roaming registration result value bit in the 5GS registration result IE to "request for registration for disaster roaming service accepted as registration not for disaster roaming service " in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

If the UE indicates "disaster roaming mobility registration updating" in the 5GS registration type IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and the 5GS registration result IE value in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message is set to:

- "request for registration for disaster roaming service accepted as registration not for disaster roaming service", the UE shall consider itself registered for normal service. If the PLMN identity of the registered PLMN is a member of the forbidden PLMN list as specified in subclause5.3.13A, any such PLMN identity shall be deleted from the corresponding list(s); or

- "no additional information", the UE shall consider itself registered for disaster roaming.

If the UE receives the Forbidden TAI(s) for the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message and the TAI(s) included in the IE is not part of the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming", the UE shall store the TAI(s) included in the IE into the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" and remove the TAI(s) from the stored TAI list if present.

If the UE receives the Forbidden TAI(s) for the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service" IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message and the TAI(s) included in the IE is not part of the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service", the UE shall store the TAI(s) included in the IE into the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service" and remove the TAI(s) from the stored TAI list if present.

5.5.1.3.5 Mobility and periodic registration update not accepted by the network

If the mobility and periodic registration update request cannot be accepted by the network, the AMF shall send a REGISTRATION REJECT message to the UE including an appropriate 5GMM cause value.

If the mobility and periodic registration update request is rejected due to general NAS level mobility management congestion control, the network shall set the 5GMM cause value to #22 "congestion" and assign a value for back-off timer T3346.

In NB-N1 mode, if the mobility and periodic registration update request is rejected due to operator determined barring (see 3GPPTS29.503[20AB]), the network shall set the 5GMM cause value to #22 "congestion" and assign a value for back-off timer T3346.

When the UE performs inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode, if the AMF is informed that verification of the integrity protection of the TRACKING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message included by the UE in the EPS NAS message container IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message has failed in the MME, then:

a) If the AMF can retrieve the current 5G NAS security context as indicated by the ngKSI and 5G-GUTI sent by the UE, the AMF shall proceed as specified in subclause5.5.1.3.4;

b) if the AMF cannot retrieve the current 5G NAS security context as indicated by the ngKSI and 5G-GUTI sent by the UE, or the ngKSI or 5G-GUTI was not sent by the UE, the AMF may initiate the identification procedure by sending the IDENTITY REQUEST message with the "Type of identity" of the 5GS identity type IE set to "SUCI" before taking actions as specified in subclause4.4.4.3; or

c) If the AMF needs to reject the mobility and periodic registration update procedure, the AMF shall send REGISTRATION REJECT message including 5GMM cause #9 "UE identity cannot be derived by the network".

If the REGISTRATION REJECT message with 5GMM cause #76 or #78 was received without integrity protection, then the UE shall discard the message. If the REGISTRATION REJECT message with 5GMM cause #62 was received without integrity protected, the behaviour of the UE is specified in subclause5.3.20.2.

Based on operator policy, if the mobility and periodic registration update request is rejected due to core network redirection for CIoT optimizations, the network shall set the 5GMM cause value to #31 "Redirection to EPC required".

NOTE1: The network can take into account the UE's S1 mode capability, the EPS CIoT network behaviour supported by the UE or the EPS CIoT network behaviour supported by the EPC to determine the rejection with the 5GMM cause value #31 "Redirection to EPC required".

If the mobility and periodic registration update request is rejected because:

a) all the S-NSSAI(s) included in the requested NSSAI (i.e. Requested NSSAI IE or Requested mapped NSSAI IE) are rejected;

b) the UE set the NSSAA bit in the 5GMM capability IE to:

1) "Network slice-specific authentication and authorization supported" and;

i) there are no default S-NSSAIs;

ii) all default S-NSSAIs are not allowed; or

iii) network slice-specific authentication and authorization has failed or been revoked for all subscribed S-NSSAIs marked as default and based on network local policy, the network decides not to initiate the network slice-specific re-authentication and re-authorization procedures for any subscribed S-NSSAI marked as default requested by the UE; or

2) "Network slice-specific authentication and authorization not supported" and;

i) there are no subscribed S-NSSAIs which are marked as default; or

ii) all subscribed S-NSSAIs marked as default are either not allowed or are subject to network slice-specific authentication and authorization; and

c) no emergency PDU session has been established for the UE;

the network shall set the 5GMM cause value to #62 "No network slices available". If the UE had included requested NSSAI in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, then the network shall include the rejected S-NSSAI(s) in the rejected NSSAI of the REGISTRATION REJECT message. Otherwise, the network may include the rejected S-NSSAI(s) in the rejected NSSAI of the REGISTRATION REJECT message.

If the UE has set the ER-NSSAI bit to "Extended rejected NSSAI supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, the rejected S-NSSAI(s) shall be included in the Extended rejected NSSAI IE of the REGISTRATION REJECT message. Otherwise the rejected S-NSSAI(s) shall be included in the Rejected NSSAI IE of the REGISTRATION REJECT message.

If the UE supports extended rejected NSSAI and the AMF determines that maximum number of UEs reached for one or more S-NSSAI(s) in the requested NSSAI as specified in subclause4.6.2.5, the AMF shall include the rejected NSSAI containing one or more S-NSSAIs with the rejection cause "S-NSSAI not available due to maximum number of UEs reached" in the Extended rejected NSSAI IE in the REGISTRATION REJECT message. In addition, the AMF may include a back-off timer value for each S-NSSAI with the rejection cause "S-NSSAI not available due to maximum number of UEs reached" in the Extended rejected NSSAI IE of the REGISTRATION REJECT message.

If the mobility and periodic registration update request from a UE supporting CAG is rejected due to CAG restrictions, the network shall set the 5GMM cause value to #76 "Not authorized for this CAG or authorized for CAG cells only" and should include the "CAG information list" in the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE in the REGISTRATION REJECT message.

NOTE2: The network cannot be certain that "CAG information list" stored in the UE is updated as result of sending of the REGISTRATION REJECT message with the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE, as the REGISTRATION REJECT message is not necessarily delivered to the UE (e.g due to abnormal radio conditions).

NOTE3: The "CAG information list" can be provided by the AMF and include no entry if no "CAG information list" exists in the subscription.

NOTE3A: If the UE supports extended CAG information list, the CAG information list can be included either in the CAG information list IE or Extended CAG information list IE.

If the UE does not support extended CAG information list, the CAG information list shall not be included in the Extended CAG information list IE.

If the mobility and periodic registration update request from a UE not supporting CAG is rejected due to CAG restrictions, the network shall operate as described in bulleti) of subclause5.5.1.3.8.

If the UE's mobility and periodic registration update request is via a satellite NG-RAN cell and the network determines that the UE is in a location where the network is not allowed to operate, see 3GPPTS23.502[9], the network shall set the 5GMM cause value in the REGISTRATION REJECT message to #78 "PLMN not allowed at the present UE location".

NOTE4: When the UE accessing network for emergency services, it is up to operator and regulatory policies whether the network needs to determine if the UE is in a location where network is not allowed to operate.

If the AMF receives the mobility and periodic registration update request including the service-level device ID set to the CAA-level UAV ID in the Service-level-AA container IE and the AMF determines that the UE is not allowed to use UAS services via 5GS based on the user's subscription data and the operator policy, the AMF shall return a REGISTRATION REJECT message with 5GMM cause #79 (UAS services not allowed).

If the mobility and periodic registration update request from a UE supporting MINT is rejected due to a disaster condition no longer being applicable in the current location of the UE, the network shall set the 5GMM cause value to #11 "PLMN not allowed" or #13 "Roaming not allowed in this tracking area" and may include a disaster return wait range in the Disaster return wait range IE in the REGISTRATION REJECT message.

If the UE initiates the registration procedure for disaster roaming and the AMF determines that it does not support providing disaster roaming services for the determined PLMN with disaster condition to the UE, then the AMF shall send a REGISTRATION REJECT message with 5GMM cause #80 (Disaster roaming for the determined PLMN with disaster condition not allowed).

Regardless of the 5GMM cause value received in the REGISTRATION REJECT message,

- if the UE receives the Forbidden TAI(s) for the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" IE in the REGISTRATION REJECT message and if the TAI(s) included in the IE is not part of the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming", the UE shall store the TAI(s) included in the IE, if not already stored, into the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" and remove the TAI(s) from the stored TAI list if present; and

- if the UE receives the Forbidden TAI(s) for the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service" IE in the REGISTRATION REJECT message and if the TAI(s) included in the IE is not part of the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service", the UE shall store the TAI(s) included in the IE, if not already stored, into the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service" and remove the TAI(s) from the stored TAI list if present.

Furthermore, the UE shall take the following actions depending on the 5GMM cause value received in the REGISTRATION REJECT message.

#3 (Illegal UE); or

#6 (Illegal ME).

 The UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2) and shall delete any 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and ngKSI.

 In case of PLMN, the UE shall consider the USIM as invalid for 5GS services until switching off, the UICC containing the USIM is removed or the timer T3245 expires as described in clause 5.3.19a.1.

 In case of SNPN, if the UE is not registered for onboarding services in SNPN and the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the UE shall consider the entry of the "list of subscriber data" with the SNPN identity of the current SNPN as invalid until the UE is switched off, the entry is updated or the timer T3245 expires as described in clause 5.3.19a.2. In case of SNPN, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the UE shall consider the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" as invalid for 3GPP access until the UE is switched off, the entry is updated or the timer T3245 expires as described in clause 5.3.19a.2. Additionally, if EAP based primary authentication and key agreement procedure using EAP-AKA' or 5G AKA based primary authentication and key agreement procedure was performed in the current SNPN, the UE shall consider the USIM as invalid for the current SNPN until switching off, the UICC containing the USIM is removed or the timer T3245 expires as described in clause 5.3.19a.2.

 If the UE is not registered for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall delete the list of equivalent PLMNs (if any) and shall move to 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.NO-SUPI state. If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS, then the UE shall:

1) set the counter for "SIM/USIM considered invalid for GPRS services" events and the counter for "USIM considered invalid for 5GS services over non-3GPP access" events to UE implementation-specific maximum value in case of PLMN if the UE maintains these counters;

2) set the counter for "the entry for the current SNPN considered invalid for 3GPP access" events and the counter for "the entry for the current SNPN considered invalid for non-3GPP access" events to UE implementation-specific maximum value in case of SNPN if the UE maintains these counters; and

3) delete the 5GMM parameters stored in non-volatile memory of the ME as specified in annexC.

3) delete the 5GMM parameters stored in non-volatile memory of the ME as specified in annexC.

 to UE implementation-specific maximum value.

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall handle the EMM parameters EMM state, EPS update status, 4G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and eKSI as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] for the case when the normal tracking area updating procedure is rejected with the EMM cause with the same value. The USIM shall be considered as invalid also for non-EPS services until switching off or the UICC containing the USIM is removed or the timer T3245 expires as described in clause 5.3.7a in 3GPP TS 24.301 [15]. If the UE is in EMM-REGISTERED state, the UE shall move to EMM-DEREGISTERED state. If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS and the UE maintains a counter for "SIM/USIM considered invalid for non-GPRS services", then the UE shall set this counter to UE implementation-specific maximum value.

 If the UE is registered for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall reset the registration attempt counter, store the SNPN identity in the "permanently forbidden SNPNs" list for onboarding services, enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH, and perform an SNPN selection or an SNPN selection for onboarding services according to 3GPPTS23.122[5]. If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS, the UE shall set the SNPN-specific attempt counter for the current SNPN to the UE implementation-specific maximum value.

 If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS and the UE also supports the registration procedure over the other access, the UE shall in addition handle 5GMM parameters and 5GMM state for this access, as described for this 5GMM cause value.

#7 (5GS services not allowed).

 The UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2) and shall delete any 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and ngKSI.

 In case of PLMN, the UE shall consider the USIM as invalid for 5GS services until switching off, the UICC containing the USIM is removed or the timer T3245 expires as described in clause 5.3.19a.1;

 In case of SNPN, if the UE is not registered for onboarding services in SNPN and the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the UE shall consider the entry of the "list of subscriber data" with the SNPN identity of the current SNPN as invalid for 5GS services until the UE is switched off, the entry is updated or the timer T3245 expires as described in clause 5.3.19a.2. In case of SNPN, if the UE is not registered for onboarding services in SNPN and the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the UE shall consider the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" as invalid for 3GPP access until the UE is switched off, the entry is updated or the timer T3245 expires as described in clause 5.3.19a.2. Additionally, if EAP based primary authentication and key agreement procedure using EAP-AKA' or 5G AKA based primary authentication and key agreement procedure was performed in the current SNPN, the UE shall consider the USIM as invalid for the current SNPN until switching off or the UICC containing the USIM is removed or the timer T3245 expires as described in clause 5.3.19a.2.

 If the UE is not registered for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall move to 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.NO-SUPI state. If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS, then the UE shall:

1) set the counter for "SIM/USIM considered invalid for GPRS services" events and the counter for "USIM considered invalid for 5GS services over non-3GPP access" events to UE implementation-specific maximum value in case of PLMN if the UE maintains these counters;

2) set the counter for "the entry for the current SNPN considered invalid for 3GPP access" events and the counter for "the entry for the current SNPN considered invalid for non-3GPP access" events to UE implementation-specific maximum value in case of SNPN if the UE maintains these counters; and

3) delete the 5GMM parameters stored in non-volatile memory of the ME as specified in annexC.

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall handle the EMM parameters EMM state, EPS update status, 4G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and eKSI as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] for the case when the normal tracking area updating procedure is rejected with the EMM cause with the same value.

 If the UE is registered for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall reset the registration attempt counter, store the SNPN identity in the "permanently forbidden SNPNs" list for onboarding services, enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH, and perform an SNPN selection or an SNPN selection for onboarding services according to 3GPPTS23.122[5]. If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS, the UE shall set the SNPN-specific attempt counter for the current SNPN to the UE implementation-specific maximum value.

 If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS and the UE also supports the registration procedure over the other access, the UE shall in addition handle 5GMM parameters and 5GMM state for this access, as described for this 5GMM cause value.

#9 (UE identity cannot be derived by the network).

 The UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U2 NOT UPDATED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2) and shall delete any 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and ngKSI. The UE shall enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.

 If the UE has initiated the registration procedure in order to enable performing the service request procedure for emergency services fallback, the UE shall attempt to select an E-UTRA cell connected to EPC or 5GCN according to the domain priority and selection rules specified in 3GPPTS23.167[6]. If the UE finds a suitable E-UTRA cell, it then proceeds with the appropriate EMM or 5GMM procedures. If the UE operating in single-registration mode has changed to S1 mode, it shall disable the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access.

 If the rejected request was neither for initiating an emergency PDU session nor for emergency services fallback, the UE shall subsequently, automatically initiate the initial registration procedure.

NOTE5: User interaction is necessary in some cases when the UE cannot re-establish the PDU session(s) automatically.

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall handle the EMM parameters EMM state, EPS update status, 4G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and eKSI as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] for the case when the normal tracking area updating procedure is rejected with the EMM cause with the same value.

#10 (implicitly de-registered).

 The UE shall enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE. The UE shall delete any mapped 5G NAS security context or partial native 5G NAS security context.

 If the UE has initiated the registration procedure in order to enable performing the service request procedure for emergency services fallback, the UE shall attempt to select an E-UTRA cell connected to EPC or 5GCN according to the domain priority and selection rules specified in 3GPPTS23.167[6]. If the UE finds a suitable E-UTRA cell, it then proceeds with the appropriate EMM or 5GMM procedures. If the UE operating in single-registration mode has changed to S1 mode, it shall disable the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access.

 If the rejected request was neither for initiating an emergency PDU session nor for emergency services fallback, the UE shall perform a new registration procedure for initial registration.

NOTE6: User interaction is necessary in some cases when the UE cannot re-establish the PDU session(s) automatically.

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall handle the EMM state as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] for the case when the normal tracking area updating procedure is rejected with the EMM cause with the same value.

#11 (PLMN not allowed).

 This cause value received from a cell belonging to an SNPN is considered as an abnormal case and the behaviour of the UE is specified in subclause5.5.1.3.7.

 The UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2) and shall delete any 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and ngKSI. The UE shall store the PLMN identity in the forbidden PLMN list as specified in subclause5.3.13A and if the UE is configured to use timer T3245 then the UE shall start timer T3245 and proceed as described in clause 5.3.19a.1, delete the list of equivalent PLMNs, reset the registration attempt counter. For 3GPP access, the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH and perform a PLMN selection according to 3GPPTS23.122[5]. For non-3GPP access the UE shall enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE and perform network selection as defined in 3GPPTS24.502[18]. If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS and the UE maintains the PLMN-specific attempt counter and the PLMN-specific attempt counter for non-3GPP access for that PLMN, the UE shall set the PLMN-specific attempt counter and the PLMN-specific attempt counter for non-3GPP access for that PLMN to the UE implementation-specific maximum value.

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall in addition handle the EMM parameters EMM state, EPS update status, 4G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list, eKSI and tracking area updating attempt counter as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] for the case when the normal tracking area updating procedure is rejected with the EMM cause with the same value.

 If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS and the UE also supports the registration procedure over the other access to the same PLMN, the UE shall in addition handle 5GMM parameters and 5GMM state for this access, as described for this 5GMM cause value.

 If the UE receives the Disaster return wait range IE in the REGISTRATION REJECT message and the UE supports MINT, the UE shall delete the disaster return wait range stored in the ME, if any, and store the disaster return wait range included in the Disaster return wait range IE in the ME.

#12 (Tracking area not allowed).

 The UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2) and shall delete 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and ngKSI. Additionally, the UE shall reset the registration attempt counter.

 If:

1) the UE is not operating in SNPN access operation mode, the UE shall store the current TAI in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service" and enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE. If the REGISTRATION REJECT message is not integrity protected, the UE shall memorize the current TAI was stored in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service" for non-integrity protected NAS reject message; or

2) the UE is operating in SNPN access operation mode, the UE shall store the current TAI in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service" for the current SNPN and, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription, and enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE. If the REGISTRATION REJECT message is not integrity protected, the UE shall memorize the current TAI was stored in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service" for the current SNPN and, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription, for non-integrity protected NAS reject message.

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall handle the EMM parameters EMM state, EPS update status, 4G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list, eKSI and tracking area updating attempt counter as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] for the case when the normal tracking area updating procedure is rejected with the EMM cause with the same value.

#13 (Roaming not allowed in this tracking area).

 The UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2) and shall delete the list of equivalent PLMNs (if available). The UE shall reset the registration attempt counter. For 3GPP acess the UE shall change to state 5GMM-REGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH, and for non-3GPP access the UE shall change to state 5GMM-REGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE.

 If the UE is registered in S1 mode and operating in dual-registration mode, the PLMN that the UE chooses to register in is specified in subclause4.8.3. Otherwise if:

1) the UE is not operating in SNPN access operation mode, the UE shall store the current TAI in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" and shall remove the current TAI from the stored TAI list if present. If the REGISTRATION REJECT message is not integrity protected, the UE shall memorize the current TAI was stored in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" for non-integrity protected NAS reject message; or

2) the UE is operating in SNPN access operation mode, the UE shall store the current TAI in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" for the current SNPN and, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription. If the REGISTRATION REJECT message is not integrity protected, the UE shall memorize the current TAI was stored in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" for the current SNPN and, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription, for non-integrity protected NAS reject message.

 For 3GPP access the UE shall perform a PLMN selection or SNPN selection according to 3GPPTS23.122[5], and for non-3GPP access the UE shall perform network selection as defined in 3GPPTS24.502[18].

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall handle the EMM parameters EMM state, EPS update status and tracking area updating attempt counter as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] for the case when the normal tracking area updating procedure is rejected with the EMM cause with the same value.

 If the UE receives the Disaster return wait range IE in the REGISTRATION REJECT message and the UE supports MINT, the UE shall delete the disaster return wait range stored in the ME, if any, and store the disaster return wait range included in the Disaster return wait range IE in the ME.

#15 (No suitable cells in tracking area).

 The UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2). The UE shall reset the registration attempt counter and shall enter the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE.

 If the UE has initiated the registration procedure in order to enable performing the service request procedure for emergency services fallback, the UE shall attempt to select an E-UTRA cell connected to EPC or 5GC according to the emergency services support indicator (see 3GPPTS36.331[25A]). If the UE finds a suitable E-UTRA cell, it then proceeds with the appropriate EMM or 5GMM procedures. If the UE operating in single-registration mode has changed to S1 mode, it shall disable the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access. Otherwise, the UE shall search for a suitable cell in another tracking area according to 3GPPTS38.304[28] or 3GPPTS36.304[25C].

 If:

1) the UE is not operating in SNPN access operation mode, the UE shall store the current TAI in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" and shall remove the current TAI from the stored TAI list, if present. If the REGISTRATION REJECT message is not integrity protected, the UE shall memorize the current TAI was stored in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" for non-integrity protected NAS reject message; or

2) the UE is operating in SNPN access operation mode, the UE shall store the current TAI in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" for the current SNPN and, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription, and shall remove the current TAI from the stored TAI list, if present. If the REGISTRATION REJECT message is not integrity protected, the UE shall memorize the current TAI was stored in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" for the current SNPN and, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription, for non-integrity protected NAS reject message.

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall handle the EMM parameters EMM state, EPS update status and tracking area updating attempt counter as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] for the case when the normal tracking area updating procedure is rejected with the EMM cause with the same value.

 If received over non-3GPP access the cause shall be considered as an abnormal case and the behaviour of the UE for this case is specified in subclause5.5.1.3.7.

#22 (Congestion).

 If the T3346 value IE is present in the REGISTRATION REJECT message and the value indicates that this timer is neither zero nor deactivated, the UE shall proceed as described below, otherwise it shall be considered as an abnormal case and the behaviour of the UE for this case is specified in subclause5.5.1.3.7.

 The UE shall abort the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update. If the rejected request was not for initiating an emergency PDU session, the UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U2 NOT UPDATED, reset the registration attempt counter and change to state 5GMM-REGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-REGISTRATION-UPDATE.

 The UE shall stop timer T3346 if it is running.

 If the REGISTRATION REJECT message is integrity protected, the UE shall start timer T3346 with the value provided in the T3346 value IE.

 If the REGISTRATION REJECT message is not integrity protected, the UE shall start timer T3346 with a random value from the default range specified in 3GPPTS24.008[12].

 The UE stays in the current serving cell and applies the normal cell reselection process. The registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update is started, if still necessary, when timer T3346 expires or is stopped.

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall handle the EMM parameters EMM state, EPS update status and tracking area updating attempt counter as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] for the case when the normal tracking area updating procedure is rejected with the EMM cause with the same value.

 If the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update was initiated for an MO MMTEL voice call (i.e. access category 4), or an MO MMTEL video call (i.e. access category 5), or an MO IMS registration related signalling (i.e. access category 9) or for NAS signalling connection recovery during an ongoing MO MMTEL voice call (i.e. access category 4), or during an ongoing MO MMTEL video call (i.e. access category 5) or during an ongoing MO IMS registration related signalling (i.e. access category 9), then a notification that the request was not accepted due to network congestion shall be provided to upper layers.

NOTE7: Upper layers specified in 3GPPTS24.173[13C] and 3GPPTS24.229[14] handle the notification that the request was not accepted due to network congestion.

 If the UE is registered for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE may enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH and perform an SNPN selection or an SNPN selection for onboarding services according to 3GPPTS23.122[5].

#27 (N1 mode not allowed).

 The UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2). Additionally, the UE shall reset the registration attempt counter and shall enter the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE. If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS, the UE shall set:

1) the PLMN-specific N1 mode attempt counter for 3GPP access and the PLMN-specific N1 mode attempt counter for non-3GPP access for that PLMN in case of PLMN; or

2) the SNPN-specific attempt counter for 3GPP access for the current SNPN and the SNPN-specific attempt counter for non-3GPP access for the current SNPN in case of SNPN;

 to the UE implementation-specific maximum value.

 The UE shall disable the N1 mode capability for the specific access type for which the message was received (see subclause4.9).

 If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS, the UE shall disable the N1 mode capability also for the other access type (see subclause4.9).

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall in addition set the EPS update status to EU3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED. Additionally, the UE shall reset the tracking area updating attempt counter and enter the state EMM-REGISTERED.

#31 (Redirection to EPC required).

 5GMM cause #31 received by a UE that has not indicated support for CIoT optimizations or not indicated support for S1 mode or received by a UE over non-3GPP access is considered an abnormal case and the behaviour of the UE is specified in subclause5.5.1.3.7.

 This cause value received from a cell belonging to an SNPN is considered as an abnormal case and the behaviour of the UE is specified in subclause5.5.1.3.7.

 The UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2). The UE shall reset the registration attempt counter and enter the state 5GMM- REGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE.

 The UE shall enable the E-UTRA capability if it was disabled and disable the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access (see subclause4.9.2).

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall handle the EMM parameters EMM state, EPS update status, and tracking area updating attempt counter as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] for the case when the normal tracking area updating procedure is rejected with the EMM cause with the same value.

#62 (No network slices available).

 The UE shall abort the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update procedure, set the 5GS update status to 5U2 NOT UPDATED and enter state 5GMM-REGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-REGISTRATION-UPDATE. Additionally, the UE shall reset the registration attempt counter.

 The UE receiving the rejected NSSAI in the REGISTRATION REJECT message takes the following actions based on the rejection cause in the rejected S-NSSAI(s):

 "S-NSSAI not available in the current PLMN or SNPN"

 The UE shall add the rejected S-NSSAI(s) in the rejected NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN as specified in subclause4.6.2.2 and shall not attempt to use this S-NSSAI(s) in the current PLMN or SNPN until switching off the UE, the UICC containing the USIM is removed, an entry of the "list of subscriber data" with the SNPN identity of the current SNPN is updated, or the rejected S-NSSAI(s) are removed as described in subclause4.6.2.2.

 "S-NSSAI not available in the current registration area"

 The UE shall add the rejected S-NSSAI(s) in the rejected NSSAI for the current registration area as specified in subclause4.6.2.2 and shall not attempt to use this S-NSSAI(s) in the current registration area until switching off the UE, the UE moving out of the current registration area, the UICC containing the USIM is removed, an entry of the "list of subscriber data" with the SNPN identity of the current SNPN is updated, or the rejected S-NSSAI(s) are removed as described in subclause4.6.2.2.

 "S-NSSAI not available due to the failed or revoked network slice-specific authentication and authorization"

 The UE shall store the rejected S-NSSAI(s) in the rejected NSSAI for the failed or revoked NSSAA as specified in subclause4.6.2.2 and shall not attempt to use this S-NSSAI in the current PLMN or SNPN over any access until switching off the UE, the UICC containing the USIM is removed, the entry of the "list of subscriber data" with the SNPN identity of the current SNPN is updated, or the rejected S-NSSAI(s) are removed or deleted as described in subclause4.6.1 and 4.6.2.2.

 "S-NSSAI not available due to maximum number of UEs reached"

 Unless the back-off timer value received along with the S-NSSAI is zero, the UE shall add the rejected S-NSSAI(s) in the rejected NSSAI for the maximum number of UEs reached as specified in subclause4.6.2.2 and shall not attempt to use this S-NSSAI in the current PLMN or SNPN over the current access until switching off the UE, the UICC containing the USIM is removed, the entry of the "list of subscriber data" with the SNPN identity of the current SNPN is updated, or the rejected S-NSSAI(s) are removed as described in subclause4.6.2.2.

NOTE8: If the back-off timer value received along with the S-NSSAI in the rejected NSSAI for the maximum number of UEs reached is zero as specified in subclause10.5.7.4a of TS24.008, the UE does not consider the S-NSSAI as the rejected S-NSSAI.

 If there is one or more S-NSSAIs in the rejected NSSAI with the rejection cause "S-NSSAI not available due to maximum number of UEs reached", then for each S-NSSAI, the UE shall behave as follows:

a) stop the timer T3526 associated with the S-NSSAI, if running;

b) start the timer T3526 with:

1) the back-off timer value received along with the S-NSSAI, if a back-off timer value is received along with the S-NSSAI that is neither zero nor deactivated; or

2) an implementation specific back-off timer value, if no back-off timer value is received along with the S-NSSAI; and

c) remove the S-NSSAI from the rejected NSSAI for the maximum number of UEs reached when the timer T3526 associated with the S-NSSAI expires.

 If the UE has an allowed NSSAI or configured NSSAI that contains S-NSSAIs which are not included in the rejected NSSAI, the UE may stay in the current serving cell, apply the normal cell reselection process and start a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update with a requested NSSAI that includes any S-NSSAI from the allowed S-NSSAI or the configured NSSAI that is not in the rejected NSSAI. Otherwise the UE may perform a PLMN selection or SNPN selection according to 3GPPTS23.122[5] and additionally, the UE may disable the N1 mode capability for the current PLMN or SNPN if the UE does not have an allowed NSSAI and each S-NSSAI in the configured NSSAI, if available, was rejected with cause "S-NSSAI not available in the current PLMN or SNPN" or "S-NSSAI not available due to the failed or revoked network slice-specific authentication and authorization" as described in subclause4.9.

 If the UE has neither allowed NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN nor configured NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN and,

1) if at least one S-NSSAI in the default configured NSSAI is not rejected, the UE may stay in the current serving cell, apply the normal cell reselection process, and start a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update with a requested NSSAI with that default configured NSSAI; or

2) if all the S-NSSAI(s) in the default configured NSSAI are rejected and at least one S-NSSAI is rejected due to "S-NSSAI not available in the current registration area",

i) if the REGISTRATION REJECT message is integrity protected and the UE is not operating in SNPN access operation mode, the UE shall store the current TAI in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" and enter the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE; or

ii) If the REGISTRATION REJECT message is integrity protected and the UE is operating in SNPN access operation mode, the UE shall store the current TAI in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" for the current SNPN and enter the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE.

 Otherwise, the UE may perform a PLMN selection or SNPN selection according to 3GPPTS23.122[5] and additionally, the UE may disable the N1 mode capability for the current PLMN or SNPN if each S-NSSAI in the default configured NSSAI was rejected with cause "S-NSSAI not available in the current PLMN or SNPN" or "S-NSSAI not available due to the failed or revoked network slice-specific authentication and authorization" as described in subclause4.9.

 If the UE has neither allowed NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN nor configured NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN and has rejected NSSAI for the reached maximum number of UEs, and the UE wants to obtain services in the current serving cell without performing a PLMN selection or SNPN selection, the UE may stay in the current serving cell and attempt to use the rejected S-NSSAI(s) for the maximum number of UEs reached in the current serving cell after rejected S-NSSAI(s) are removed as described in subclause4.6.2.2.

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall in addition set the EPS update status to EU2 NOT UPDATED, reset the tracking area updating attempt counter and enter the state EMM-REGISTERED.

#72 (Non-3GPP access to 5GCN not allowed).

 When received over non-3GPP access the UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2) and shall delete 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and ngKSI. Additionally, the UE shall reset the registration attempt counter and enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED. If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS, the UE shall set:

1) the PLMN-specific N1 mode attempt counter for non-3GPP access for that PLMN in case of PLMN; or

2) the SNPN-specific attempt counter for non-3GPP access for that SNPN in case of SNPN;

 to the UE implementation-specific maximum value.

NOTE9: The 5GMM sublayer states, the 5GMM parameters and the registration status are managed per access type independently, i.e. 3GPP access or non-3GPP access (see subclauses4.7.2 and 5.1.3).

 The UE shall disable the N1 mode capability for non-3GPP access (see subclause4.9.3).

 As an implementation option, the UE may enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH in order to perform a PLMN selection according to 3GPPTS23.122[5].

 If received over 3GPP access the cause shall be considered as an abnormal case and the behaviour of the UE for this case is specified in subclause5.5.1.3.7.

#73 (Serving network not authorized).

 This cause value received from a cell belonging to an SNPN is considered as an abnormal case and the behaviour of the UE is specified in subclause5.5.1.3.7.

 The UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2) and shall delete any 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and ngKSI. The UE shall delete the list of equivalent PLMNs, reset the registration attempt counter, store the PLMN identity in the forbidden PLMN list as specified in subclause5.3.13A. For 3GPP access the UE shall enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH in order to perform a PLMN selection according to 3GPPTS23.122[5], and for non-3GPP access the UE shall enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE and perform network selection as defined in 3GPPTS24.502[18]. If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS, the UE shall set the PLMN-specific attempt counter and the PLMN-specific attempt counter for non-3GPP access for that PLMN to the UE implementation-specific maximum value.

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall in addition set the EPS update status to EU3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED and shall delete any 4G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and eKSI. Additionally, the UE shall reset the tracking area updating attempt counter and enter the state EMM-DEREGISTERED.

#74 (Temporarily not authorized for this SNPN).

 5GMM cause #74 is only applicable when received from a cell belonging to an SNPN. 5GMM cause #74 received from a cell not belonging to an SNPN is considered as an abnormal case and the behaviour of the UE is specified in subclause5.5.1.3.7.

 The UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2) and shall delete any 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and ngKSI. The UE shall reset the registration attempt counter and store the SNPN identity in the "temporarily forbidden SNPNs" list for the specific access type for which the message was received and, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription. If the UE is not registered for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH and perform an SNPN selection according to 3GPPTS23.122[5]. If the UE is registered for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH and perform an SNPN selection or an SNPN selection for onboarding services according to 3GPPTS23.122[5]. If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS, the UE shall set the SNPN-specific attempt counter for 3GPP access and the SNPN-specific attempt counter for non-3GPP access for the current SNPN to the UE implementation-specific maximum value.

 If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS and the UE also supports the registration procedure over the other access to the same SNPN, the UE shall in addition handle 5GMM parameters and 5GMM state for this access, as described for this 5GMM cause value.

NOTE10: When 5GMM cause #74 is received over 3GPP access, the term "other access" in "the UE also supports the registration procedure over the other access to the same SNPN" is used to express access to SNPN services via a PLMN.

NOTE11: The term "non-3GPP access" in an SNPN refers to the case where the UE is accessing SNPN services via a PLMN.

#75 (Permanently not authorized for this SNPN).

 5GMM cause #75 is only applicable when received from a cell belonging to an SNPN with a globally-unique SNPN identity. 5GMM cause #75 received from a cell not belonging to an SNPN or a cell belonging to an SNPN with a non-globally-unique SNPN identity is considered as an abnormal case and the behaviour of the UE is specified in subclause5.5.1.3.7.

 The UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2) and shall delete any 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and ngKSI. The UE shall reset the registration attempt counter and store the SNPN identity in the "permanently forbidden SNPNs" list for the specific access type for which the message was received and, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription. If the UE is not registered for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH and perform an SNPN selection according to 3GPPTS23.122[5]. If the UE is registered for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH and perform an SNPN selection or an SNPN selection for onboarding services according to 3GPPTS23.122[5]. If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS, the UE shall set the SNPN-specific attempt counter for 3GPP access and the SNPN-specific attempt counter for non-3GPP access for the current SNPN to the UE implementation-specific maximum value.

 If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS and the UE also supports the registration procedure over the other access to the same SNPN, the UE shall in addition handle 5GMM parameters and 5GMM state for this access, as described for this 5GMM cause value.

NOTE12: When 5GMM cause #75 is received over 3GPP access, the term "other access" in "the UE also supports the registration procedure over the other access to the same SNPN" is used to express access to SNPN services via a PLMN.

NOTE13: The term "non-3GPP access" in an SNPN refers to the case where the UE is accessing SNPN services via a PLMN.

#76 (Not authorized for this CAG or authorized for CAG cells only).

 This cause value received via non-3GPP access or from a cell belonging to an SNPN is considered as an abnormal case and the behaviour of the UE is specified in subclause5.5.1.3.7.

 The UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3.ROAMING NOT ALLOWED, store the 5GS update status according to clause5.1.3.2.2, and reset the registration attempt counter.

 If 5GMM cause #76 is received from:

1) a CAG cell, and if the UE receives a "CAG information list" in the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE included in the REGISTRATION REJECT message, the UE shall:

i) replace the "CAG information list" stored in the UE with the received CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE when received in the HPLMN or EHPLMN;

ii) replace the serving VPLMN's entry of the "CAG information list" stored in the UE with the serving VPLMN's entry of the received CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE when the UE receives the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE in a serving PLMN other than the HPLMN or EHPLMN; or

NOTE14: When the UE receives the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE in a serving PLMN other than the HPLMN or EHPLMN, entries of a PLMN other than the serving VPLMN, if any, in the received CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE are ignored.

iii) remove the serving VPLMN's entry of the "CAG information list" stored in the UE when the UE receives the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE in a serving PLMN other than the HPLMN or EHPLMN and the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE does not contain the serving VPLMN's entry.

 Otherwise, the UE shall delete the CAG-ID(s) of the cell from the "allowed CAG list" for the current PLMN. In the case the "allowed CAG list" for the current PLMN only contains a range of CAG-IDs, how the UE deletes the CAG-ID(s) of the cell from the "allowed CAG list" for the current PLMN is up to UE implementation. In addition:

i) if the entry in the "CAG information list" for the current PLMN does not include an "indication that the UE is only allowed to access 5GS via CAG cells" or if the entry in the "CAG information list" for the current PLMN includes an "indication that the UE is only allowed to access 5GS via CAG cells" and the updated "allowed CAG list" for the current PLMN includes one or more CAG-IDs, then the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE and shall search for a suitable cell according to 3GPPTS38.304[28] or 3GPPTS36.304[25C] with the updated "CAG information list";

ii) if the entry in the "CAG information list" for the current PLMN includes an "indication that the UE is only allowed to access 5GS via CAG cells" and the updated "allowed CAG list" for the current PLMN does not include any CAG-ID, then the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH and shall apply the PLMN selection process defined in 3GPP TS 23.122 [5] with the updated "CAG information list"; or

iii) if the "CAG information list" does not include an entry for the current PLMN, then the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE and shall search for a suitable cell according to 3GPPTS38.304[28] or 3GPPTS36.304[25C] with the updated "CAG information list".

2) a non-CAG cell, and if the UE receives a "CAG information list" in the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE included in the REGISTRATION REJECT message, the UE shall:

i) replace the "CAG information list" stored in the UE with the received CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE when received in the HPLMN or EHPLMN;

ii) replace the serving VPLMN's entry of the "CAG information list" stored in the UE with the serving VPLMN's entry of the received CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE when the UE receives the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE in a serving PLMN other than the HPLMN or EHPLMN; or

NOTE15: When the UE receives the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE in a serving PLMN other than the HPLMN or EHPLMN, entries of a PLMN other than the serving VPLMN, if any, in the received CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE are ignored.

iii) remove the serving VPLMN's entry of the "CAG information list" stored in the UE when the UE receives the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE in a serving PLMN other than the HPLMN or EHPLMN and the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE does not contain the serving VPLMN's entry.

 Otherwise, the UE shall store an "indication that the UE is only allowed to access 5GS via CAG cells" in the entry of the "CAG information list" for the current PLMN, if any. If the "CAG information list" stored in the UE does not include the current PLMN's entry, the UE shall add an entry for the current PLMN to the "CAG information list" and store an "indication that the UE is only allowed to access 5GS via CAG cells" in the entry of the "CAG information list" for the current PLMN. If the UE does not have a stored "CAG information list", the UE shall create a new "CAG information list" and add an entry with an "indication that the UE is only allowed to access 5GS via CAG cells" for the current PLMN.

In addition:

i) if the "allowed CAG list" for the current PLMN includes one or more CAG-IDs, then the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE and shall search for a suitable cell according to 3GPPTS38.304[28] with the updated CAG information; or

ii) if the "allowed CAG list" for the current PLMN does not include any CAG-ID, then the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH and shall apply the PLMN selection process defined in 3GPP TS 23.122 [5] with the updated "CAG information list".

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall in addition set the EPS update status to EU3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED, reset the tracking area updating attempt counter and enter the state EMM-REGISTERED.

#77 (Wireline access area not allowed).

 5GMM cause #77 is only applicable when received from a wireline access network by the 5G-RG or the W-AGF acting on behalf of the FN-CRG (or on behalf of the N5GC device). 5GMM cause #77 received from a 5G access network other than a wireline access network and 5GMM cause #77 received by the W-AGF acting on behalf of the FN-BRG are considered as abnormal cases and the behaviour of the UE is specified in subclause5.5.1.3.7.

 When received over wireline access network, the 5G-RG and the W-AGF acting on behalf of the FN-CRG (or on behalf of the N5GC device) shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2), shall delete 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and ngKSI, shall reset the registration attempt counter, shall enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED and shall act as specified in subclause5.3.23.

NOTE16: The 5GMM sublayer states, the 5GMM parameters and the registration status are managed per access type independently, i.e. 3GPP access or non-3GPP access (see subclauses4.7.2 and 5.1.3).

#78 (PLMN not allowed to operate at the present UE location).

 This cause value received from a non-satellite NG-RAN cell is considered as an abnormal case and the behaviour of the UE is specified in subclause5.5.1.3.7.

 The UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2) and shall delete 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and ngKSI. Additionally, the UE shall reset the registration attempt counter. The UE shall store the PLMN identity and, if it is known, the current geographical location in the list of "PLMNs not allowed to operate at the present UE location" and shall start a corresponding timer instance (see subclause4.23.2). The UE shall enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH and perform a PLMN selection according to 3GPPTS23.122[5].

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall handle the EMM parameters EMM state, EPS update status, and tracking area updating attempt counter as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] for the case when the normal tracking area updating procedure is rejected with the EMM cause with the same value.

#79 (UAS services not allowed).

 The UE shall abort the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update procedure, set the 5GS update status to 5U2 NOT UPDATED and enter state 5GMM-REGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-REGISTRATION-UPDATE. Additionally, the UE shall reset the registration attempt counter. The UE may re-attempt the registration procedure to the current PLMN for services other than UAS services and shall not include the service-level device ID set to the CAA-level UAV ID in the Service-level-AA container IE of REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall in addition set the EPS update status to EU2 NOT UPDATED, reset the tracking area updating attempt counter and enter the state EMM-REGISTERED.

#80 (Disaster roaming for the determined PLMN with disaster condition not allowed).

 The UE shall abort the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update procedure, set the 5GS update status to 5U2 NOT UPDATED and enter state 5GMM-REGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-REGISTRATION-UPDATE. Additionally, the UE shall reset the registration attempt counter. The UE shall not attempt to register for disaster roaming on this PLMN for the determined PLMN with disaster condition for a period in the range of 12 to 24 hours. The UE shall not attempt to register for disaster roaming on this PLMN for a period in the range of 3 to 10 minutes. The UE shall perform PLMN selection as described in 3GPP TS 23.122 [6].

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall in addition set the EPS update status to EU2 NOT UPDATED, reset the tracking area updating attempt counter and enter the state EMM-REGISTERED.

Other values are considered as abnormal cases. The behaviour of the UE in those cases is specified in subclause5.5.1.3.7.

5.5.1.3.6 Mobility and periodic registration update for initiating an emergency PDU session not accepted by the network

If the mobility and periodic registration update request for initiating an emergency PDU session cannot be accepted by the network, the UE shall perform the procedures as described in subclause5.5.1.3.5. Then if the UE is in the same selected PLMN where the last mobility and periodic registration update request was attempted, the UE shall:

a) inform the upper layers of the failure of the procedure; or

NOTE1: This can result in the upper layers requesting implementation specific mechanisms, e.g. procedures specified in 3GPPTS24.229[14] can result in the emergency call being attempted to another IP-CAN.

b) perform de-registration locally, if not de-registered already, and attempt initial registration for emergency services.

If the mobility and periodic registration update request for initiating an emergency PDU session fails due to abnormal case b) in subclause5.5.1.3.7, the UE shall perform the actions as described in subclause5.5.1.3.7 and inform the upper layers of the failure to access the network.

NOTE2: This can result in the upper layers requesting implementation specific mechanisms, e.g. procedures specified in 3GPPTS24.229[14] can result in the emergency call being attempted to another IP-CAN.

If the mobility and periodic registration update request for initiating an emergency PDU session fails due to abnormal cases c) or d) in subclause5.5.1.3.7, the UE shall perform the procedures as described in subclause5.5.1.3.7. Then if the UE is in the same selected PLMN where the last mobility and periodic registration update request was attempted, the UE shall:

a) inform the upper layers of the failure of the procedure; or

NOTE3: This can result in the upper layers requesting implementation specific mechanisms, e.g. procedures specified in 3GPPTS24.229[14] can result in the emergency call being attempted to another IP-CAN.

b) perform de-registration locally, if not de-registered already, and attempt initial registration for emergency services.

5.5.1.3.6A Mobility and periodic registration update for an emergency services fallback not accepted by the network

If the mobility and periodic registration update request for initiating an emergency services fallback:

- fails due to an abnormal case described in subclause5.5.1.3.7, the UE shall perform the procedures as described in subclause5.5.1.3.7; or

- cannot be accepted by the network as described in subclause5.5.1.3.5, the UE shall perform the procedures as described in subclause5.5.1.3.5.

If the mobility and periodic registration update request for initiating an emergency services fallback fails due to abnormal case b) in subclause5.5.1.3.7, the UE shall inform the upper layers of the failure to access the network.

NOTE1: This can result in the upper layers requesting implementation specific mechanisms, e.g. procedures specified in 3GPPTS24.229[14] can result in the emergency call being attempted to another IP-CAN.

If the mobility and periodic registration update request for initiating an emergency services fallback fails due to abnormal cases c) or d) or cannot be accepted and the UE does not attempt to select an E-UTRA cell connected to EPC or 5GCN as described in subclause5.5.1.3.5 and the UE is camped on NR or E-UTRA cell connected to 5GCN in the same PLMN where the last mobility and periodic registration update request was attempted, the UE shall inform the upper layers of the failure of the procedure.

NOTE2: This can result in the upper layers requesting implementation specific mechanisms, e.g. procedures specified in 3GPPTS24.229[14] can result in the emergency call being attempted to another IP-CAN.

5.5.1.3.7 Abnormal cases in the UE

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a) Timer T3346 is running.

 The UE shall not start the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update unless:

1) the UE is in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode;

2) the UE received a paging;

3) the UE receives a NOTIFICATION message over non-3GPP access when the UE is in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode over non-3GPP access and in 5GMM-IDLE mode over 3GPP access;

4) the UE is a UE configured for high priority access in selected PLMN;

5) the UE has an emergency PDU session established or is establishing an emergency PDU session;

6) the UE receives a request from the upper layers to perform emergency services fallback;

7) the UE receives the CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message as specified in subclause5.4.4.3;

8) the UE in NB-N1 mode is requested by the upper layer to transmit user data related to an exceptional event and:

- the UE is allowed to use exception data reporting (see the ExceptionDataReportingAllowed leaf of the NAS configuration MO in 3GPPTS24.368[17] or the USIM file EFNASCONFIG in 3GPPTS31.102[22]); and

- timer T3346 was not started when N1 NAS signalling connection was established with RRC establishment cause set to "mo-ExceptionData"; or

9) the MUSIM UE needs to request a new 5G-GUTI assignment as specified in subclause5.5.1.3.2.

 The UE stays in the current serving cell and applies the normal cell reselection process.

NOTE1: It is considered an abnormal case if the UE needs to initiate a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update while timer T3346 is running independent on whether timer T3346 was started due to an abnormal case or a non-successful case.

 If the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update was initiated for an MO MMTEL voice call (i.e. access category 4), for an MO MMTEL video call (i.e. access category 5), for an MO IMS registration related signalling (i.e. access category 9) or for NAS signalling connection recovery during an ongoing MO MMTEL voice call (i.e. access category 4), or during an MO MMTEL video call (i.e. access category 5) or during an ongoing MO IMS registration related signalling (i.e. access category 9), then a notification that the procedure was not initiated due to network congestion shall be provided to upper layers.

b) The lower layers indicate that the access attempt is barred.

 The UE shall not start the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update. The UE stays in the current serving cell and applies the normal cell reselection process. Receipt of the access barred indication shall not trigger the selection of a different core network type (EPC or 5GCN).

 The registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update is started, if still needed, when the lower layers indicate that the barring is alleviated for the access category with which the access attempt was associated.

ba) The lower layers indicate that:

1) access barring is applicable for all access categories except categories 0 and 2 and the access category with which the access attempt was associated is other than 0 and 2; or

2) access barring is applicable for all access categories except category 0 and the access category with which the access attempt was associated is other than 0.

 If the REGISTRATION REQUEST message has not been sent, the UE shall proceed as specified for case b. If the REGISTRATION REQUEST message has been sent, the UE shall proceed as specified for case e and, additionally, the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update is started, if still needed, when the lower layers indicate that the barring is alleviated for the access category with which the access attempt was associated. For additional UE requirements for both cases see subclause4.5.5.

c) T3510 timeout.

 The UE shall abort the registration update procedure and the N1 NAS signalling connection, if any, shall be released locally.

 If the UE has initiated the registration procedure in order to enable performing the service request procedure for emergency services fallback,the UE shall inform the upper layers of the failure of the emergency services fallback (see 3GP PTS24.229[14]). Otherwise, the UE shall proceed as described below.

d) REGISTRATION REJECT message, other 5GMM cause values than those treated in subclause5.5.1.3.5, and cases of 5GMM cause values #11, #15, #22, #31, #72, #73, #74, #75, #76, #77 and #78, if considered as abnormal cases according to subclause5.5.1.3.5.

 Upon reception of the 5GMM causes #95, #96, #97, #99 and #111 the UE should set the registration attempt counter to 5.

 The UE shall proceed as described below.

e) Lower layer failure, release of the NAS signalling connection received from lower layers or the lower layers indicate that the RRC connection has been suspended without a cell change before the REGISTRATION ACCEPT or REGISTRATION REJECT message is received.

 The UE shall abort the registration procedure and proceed as described below.

f) Change in the current TAI.

 If the current TAI is changed before the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update is completed, the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update shall be aborted and re-initiated immediately. The UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U2 NOT UPDATED.

g) Registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update and de-registration procedure collision.

 If the UE receives a DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message without 5GMM cause value #11, #12, #13 or #15 before the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update has been completed, the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update shall be aborted and the de-registration procedure shall be progressed.

 If the UE receives a DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message with 5GMM cause value #11, #12, #13 or #15 before the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update has been completed, the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update shall be progressed and the de-registration procedure shall be aborted.

NOTE2: The registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update shall be aborted only if the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message indicates in the access type that the access in which the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update was attempted shall be de-registered. Otherwise both the procedures shall be progressed.

h) Void

i) Transmission failure of REGISTRATION REQUEST message indication from the lower layers or the lower layers indicate that the RRC connection has been suspended with a cell change.

 The registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update shall be aborted and re-initiated immediately. The UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U2 NOT UPDATED.

j) Transmission failure of REGISTRATION COMPLETE message indication with change in the current TAI.

 If the current TAI is not in the TAI list, the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update shall be aborted and re-initiated immediately. The UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U2 NOT UPDATED.

 If the current TAI is still part of the TAI list, it is up to the UE implementation how to re-run the ongoing procedure.

k) Transmission failure of REGISTRATION COMPLETE message indication without change in the current TAI.

 It is up to the UE implementation how to re-run the ongoing procedure.

l) UE-initiated de-registration required.

 De-registration due to removal of USIM or entry update in the "list of subscriber data" or due to switch off:

 The registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update shall be aborted, and the UE initiated de-registration procedure shall be performed.

 De-registration not due to removal of USIM or entry update in the "list of subscriber data" and not due to switch off:

 the UE initiated de-registration procedure shall be initiated after successful completion of the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update.

m) Timer T3447 is running

 The UE shall not start any mobility and periodic registration update procedure with Uplink data status IE or Follow-on request indicator set to "Follow-on request pending" unless:

- the UE received a paging;

- the UE is a UE configured for high priority access in selected PLMN;

- the UE has an emergency PDU session established or is establishing an emergency PDU session;

- the UE receives a request from the upper layers to perform emergency services fallback; or

- the MUSIM UE needs to request a new 5G-GUTI assignment as specified in subclause5.5.1.3.2.

 The UE stays in the current serving cell and applies the normal cell reselection process. The mobility and periodic registration update procedure is started, if still necessary, when timer T3447 expires or timer T3447 is stopped.

n) Timer T3448 is running

 The UE in 5GMM-IDLE mode shall not start any mobility and periodic registration update procedure with Follow-on request indicator set to "Follow-on request pending" unless:

1) the UE is a UE configured for high priority access in selected PLMN;

2) the UE which is only using 5GS services with control plane CIoT 5GS optimization received a paging request; or

3) the UE in NB-N1 mode is requested by the upper layer to transmit user data related to an exceptional event and the UE is allowed to use exception data reporting (see the ExceptionDataReportingAllowed leaf of the NAS configuration MO in 3GPPTS24.368[17] or the USIM file EFNASCONFIG in 3GPPTS31.102[22]).

 The UE stays in the current serving cell and applies the normal cell reselection process. The mobility and periodic registration update procedure is started, if still necessary, when timer T3448 expires.

For the cases c, d and e the UE shall proceed as follows:

 Timer T3510 shall be stopped if still running.

 If the registration procedure is not for initiating an emergency PDU session, the registration attempt counter shall be incremented, unless it was already set to 5.

 If the registration attempt counter is less than 5:

- if the TAI of the current serving cell is not included in the TAI list or the 5GS update status is different to 5U1 UPDATED or if the registration procedure was triggered due to cases c, g, n, v in subclause5.5.1.3.2, the UE shall start timer T3511, shall set the 5GS update status to 5U2 NOT UPDATED and change to state 5GMM-REGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-REGISTRATION-UPDATE. When timer T3511 expires, the registration update procedure is triggered again.

- if the TAI of the current serving cell is included in the TAI list, the 5GS update status is equal to 5U1 UPDATED, and the UE is not performing the registration procedure after an inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode, the UE shall keep the 5GS update status to 5U1 UPDATED and enter state 5GMM-REGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE or 5GMM-REGISTERED.NON-ALLOWED-SERVICE (as described in subclause5.3.5.2). The UE shall start timer T3511. If in addition the REGISTRATION REQUEST message did not include the MICO indication IE or the Extended DRX IE, and:

- the REGISTRATION REQUEST message indicated "periodic registration updating";

- the registration procedure was initiated to recover the NAS signalling connection due to "RRC Connection failure" from the lower layers; or

- the registration procedure was initiated by the UE in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode with RRC inactive indication entering a cell in the current registration area belonging to an equivalent PLMN of the registered PLMN and not belonging to the registered PLMN,

 and none of the other reasons for initiating the registration updating procedure listed in subclause5.5.1.3.2 was applicable, the timer T3511 may be stopped when the UE enters 5GMM-CONNECTED mode.

- if the TAI of the current serving cell is included in the TAI list, the 5GS update status is equal to 5U1 UPDATED and the UE is performing the registration procedure after an inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode, the UE shall change the 5GS update status to 5U2 NOT UPDATED and enter state 5GMM-REGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-REGISTRATION-UPDATE. The UE shall start timer T3511.

- If the procedure is performed via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall in addition handle the EPS update status as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] for the abnormal cases when a normal or periodic tracking area updating procedure fails and the tracking area attempt counter is less than 5 and the EPS update status is different from EU1 UPDATED.

 If the registration attempt counter is equal to 5

- the UE shall start timer T3502, shall set the 5GS update status to 5U2 NOT UPDATED.

- the UE shall delete the list of equivalent PLMNs (if any) and shall change to state 5GMM-REGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-REGISTRATION-UPDATE or optionally to 5GMM-REGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH in order to perform a PLMN selection, SNPN selection or SNPN selection for onboarding services according to 3GPPTS23.122[5].

- if the procedure is performed via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode:

- the UE shall in addition handle the EPS update status as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] for the abnormal cases when a normal or periodic tracking area updating procedure fails and the tracking area attempt counter is equal to 5; and

- if the UE does not change to state 5GMM-REGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH, the UE shall attempt to select E-UTRAN radio access technology. The UE may disable the N1 mode capability as specified in subclause4.9.

5.5.1.3.8 Abnormal cases on the network side

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a) If a lower layer failure occurs before the message REGISTRATION COMPLETE has been received from the UE and timer T3550 is running, the AMF shall abort the procedure, enter 5GMM-IDLE mode.

 If a new 5G-GUTI was assigned to the UE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message, the AMF shall consider both, the old and new 5G-GUTIs as valid until the old 5G-GUTI can be considered as invalid by the AMF. If a new TAI list was provided in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message, both the old and new TAI lists shall also be considered valid until the old TAI list can be considered invalid by the AMF. If the old 5G-GUTI was allocated by an AMF other than the current AMF, the current AMF does not need to retain the old 5G-GUTI.

 Additionally, if the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message includes:

1) Negotiated PEIPS assistance information IE containing a new Paging subgroup ID and the UE is previously assigned a different Paging subgroup ID then, the AMF shall consider both, the old and new Paging subgroup IDs as valid until the old Paging subgroup ID can be considered as invalid by the AMF; or

2) Negotiated PEIPS assistance information IE containing no Paging subgroup ID or no Negotiated PEIPS assistance information IE, then the AMF shall delete any old Paging subgroup ID stored in the 5GMM context of the UE.

 During this period:

1) if the new 5G-GUTI is used by the UE in a subsequent message, then:

i) the AMF shall consider the old 5G-GUTI as invalid and, additionally, the old TAI list as invalid if a new TAI list was provided with the new 5G-GUTI in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message; and

ii) if the AMF assigns a new Paging subgroup ID to the UE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message, then, the AMF shall consider the new Paging subgroup ID as valid and the old Paging subgroup ID, if any, as invalid.

2) if the old 5G-GUTI is used by the UE in a subsequent message, the AMF may use the identification procedure followed by a generic UE configuration update procedure. If the AMF in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message:

i) assigns a new Paging subgroup ID to the UE, then, the AMF shall include the PEIPS assistance information; or

ii) does not assign a Paging subgroup ID to the UE then, the AMF shall not include the PEIPS assistance information;

and initiate the generic UE configuration update procedure; and

3) if the UE needs to be paged:

i) if in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message:

- a new Paging subgroup ID is assigned to the UE that previously has no Paging subgroup ID assigned then, the AMF shall use the new Paging subgroup ID for paging the UE;

- a new Paging subgroup ID is assigned to the UE that is same as the old Paging subgroup ID then, the AMF shall use the same Paging subgroup ID for paging the UE; and

- a new Paging subgroup ID is assigned to the UE that is different than the old Paging subgroup ID then, the AMF may first use the old Paging subgroup ID followed by the new Paging subgroup ID for paging the UE.

ii) the AMF selects the 5G-GUTI and TAI list as follows:

- the AMF may first use the old 5G-S-TMSI from the old 5G-GUTI for paging within the area defined by the old TAI list for an implementation dependent number of paging attempts using the selected Paging subgroup ID. If a new TAI list was provided in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message, the new TAI list should also be used for paging. Upon response from the UE, the AMF may initiate the generic UE configuration update procedure. If the response is received from a tracking area within the old and new TAI list, the network shall initiate the generic UE configuration update procedure. If in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message a new Paging subgroup ID was assigned to the UE that is different than the old Paging subgroup ID then the network shall initiate the generic UE configuration update procedure; and

- if no response is received to the paging attempts using the old 5G-S-TMSI from the old 5G-GUTI and the old Paging subgroup ID, the AMF may use the new 5G-S-TMSI from the new 5G-GUTI and the new Paging subgroup ID, if any, for paging, for an implementation dependent number of paging attempts. In this case, if a new TAI list was provided with the new 5G-GUTI in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message, the new TAI list shall be used instead of the old TAI list.

b) Protocol error.

 If the REGISTRATION REQUEST message has been received with a protocol error, the AMF shall return a REGISTRATION REJECT message with one of the following 5GMM cause values:

#96 invalid mandatory information;

#99 information element non-existent or not implemented;

#100 conditional IE error; or

#111 protocol error, unspecified.

c) T3550 time out.

 On the first expiry of the timer, the AMF shall retransmit the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message and shall reset and restart timer T3550. The retransmission is performed four times, i.e. on the fifth expiry of timer T3550, the registration procedure for mobility and periodic update procedure is aborted.

 If a new 5G-GUTI was assigned to the UE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message, both, the old and new 5G-GUTI shall be considered as valid until the old 5G-GUTI can be considered as invalid by the AMF. If a new TAI list was provided in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message, both the old and new TAI lists shall also be considered valid until the old TAI list can be considered invalid by the AMF. If the old 5G-GUTI was allocated by an AMF other than the current AMF, the current AMF does not need to retain the old 5G-GUTI. During this period the AMF acts as described for casea) above.

d) REGISTRATION REQUEST with 5GS registration type IE set to "mobility registration updating" or "periodic registration updating" received after the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message has been sent and before the REGISTRATION COMPLETE message is received, if the REGISTRATION COMPLETE message is expected.

1) If one or more of the information elements in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message differ from the ones received within the previous REGISTRATION REQUEST message, the previously initiated registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update shall be aborted if the REGISTRATION COMPLETE message has not been received and the new registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update shall be progressed; or

2) if the information elements do not differ, then the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message shall be resent and timer T3550 shall be restarted. In that case, the retransmission counter related to timer T3550 is not incremented.

e) More than one REGISTRATION REQUEST message with 5GS registration type IE set to "mobility registration updating" or "periodic registration updating" received and neither REGISTRATION ACCEPT message nor REGISTRATION REJECT message has been sent.

1) If one or more of the information elements in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message differs from the ones received within the previous REGISTRATION REQUEST message, the previously initiated registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update shall be aborted and the new registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update shall be progressed; or

2) if the information elements do not differ, then the network shall continue with the previous registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update and shall not treat any further this REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

f) Lower layers indication of non-delivered NAS PDU due to handover.

 If the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message or REGISTRATION REJECT message could not be delivered due to an intra AMF handover and the target TA is included in the TAI list, then upon successful completion of the intra AMF handover the AMF shall retransmit the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message or REGISTRATION REJECT message. If a failure of the handover procedure is reported by the lower layer and the N1 NAS signalling connection exists, the AMF shall retransmit the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message or REGISTRATION REJECT message.

g) DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message received before REGISTRATION COMPLETE message is received, if the REGISTRATION COMPLETE message is expected.

 If the De-registration type IE is set to "switch off":

 The AMF shall abort the signalling for the registration procedure for mobility and periodic update towards the UE and shall progress the de-registration procedure as described in subclause5.5.2.2.

NOTE1: Internally in the AMF, before processing the de-registration request, the AMF can perform the necessary signalling procedures for the registration procedure for mobility and periodic update before progressing the de-registration procedure.

 If the De-registration type IE is set to other type than "switch off":

 The AMF shall proceed with registration procedure for mobility and periodic update and shall progress the de-registration procedure after successful completion of the registration procedure for mobility and periodic update.

h) If the REGISTRATION REQUEST message with 5GS registration type IE indicating "periodic registration updating" is received by the new AMF which does not have the 5GMM context data related to the subscription, the new AMF may send the REGISTRATION REJECT message with 5GMM cause #10 "implicitly de-registered".

i) Based on operator policy, if the mobility and periodic registration update request from a UE not supporting CAG is rejected due to CAG restrictions, the network shall reject the mobility and periodic registration update request with a 5GMM cause value other than the 5GMM cause #76 (Not authorized for this CAG or authorized for CAG cells only).

NOTE2: 5GMM cause #7 (5GS services not allowed), 5GMM cause #11 (PLMN not allowed), 5GMM cause #27 (N1 mode not allowed), 5GMM cause #73 (Serving network not authorized) can be used depending on the subscription of the UE and whether the UE roams or not.

5.5.2 De-registration procedure

5.5.2.1 General

The de-registration procedure is used:

a) by the UE to de-register for 5GS services over 3GPP access when the UE is registered over 3GPP access;

b) by the UE to de-register for 5GS services over non-3GPP access when the UE is registered over non-3GPP access;

c) by the UE to de-register for 5GS services over 3GPP access, non-3GPP access or both when the UE is registered in the same PLMN over both accesses;

d) by the network to inform the UE that it is deregistered for 5GS services over 3GPP access when the UE is registered over 3GPP access;

e) by the network to inform the UE that it is deregistered for 5GS services over non-3GPP access when the UE is registered over non-3GPP access;

f) by the network to inform the UE that it is deregistered for 5GS services over 3GPP access, non-3GPP access or both when the UE is registered in the same PLMN over both accesses;

g) by the network to inform the UE to re-register to the network; and

h) by the network to inform the UE supporting UAS service that it is deregistered for UAS services in 5GS.

The de-registration procedure with appropriate de-registration type shall be invoked by the UE:

a) if the UE is switched off;

b) as part of the eCall inactivity procedure defined in subclause5.5.3; and

c) as part of USIM removal.

The de-registration procedure with appropriate de-registration type shall be invoked by the network:

a) if the network informs whether the UE should re-register to the network.

The de-registration procedure with appropriate access type shall be invoked by the UE:

a) if the UE needs to de-register for 5GS services over 3GPP access when the UE is registered over 3GPP access;

b) if the UE needs to de-register for 5GS services over non-3GPP access when the UE is registered over non-3GPP access;

c) the UE needs to de-register for 5GS services over 3GPP access, non-3GPP access or both when the UE is registered in the same PLMN over both accesses; or

d) to de-register for 5GS services over 3GPP access, if the UE is registered for disaster roaming over 3GPP access and has successfully registered over non-3GPP access on another PLMN.

The de-registration procedure with appropriate access type shall be invoked by the network:

a) if the network needs to inform the UE that it is deregistered over 3GPP access when the UE is registered over 3GPP access;

b) if the network needs to inform the UE that it is deregistered over non-3GPP access when the UE is registered over non-3GPP access; or

c) if the network needs to inform the UE that it is deregistered over 3GPP access, non-3GPP access or both when the UE is registered in the same PLMN over both accesses.

If the de-registration procedure is triggered due to USIM removal, the UE shall indicate "switch off" in the de-registration type IE.

If the de-registration procedure is requested by the network for a UE that has an emergency PDU session, the AMF shall not send a DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message to the UE and indicate to the SMF to release all non-emergency PDU sessions as specified in 3GPPTS23.502[9].

If the de-registration procedure for 5GS services is performed, a local release of the PDU sessions over the indicated access(es), if any, for this particular UE is performed. If a PDU session that will be released is associated with one or more MBS sessions, the UE is considered as removed from the associated MBS sessions.

The UE is allowed to initiate the de-registration procedure even if the timer T3346 is running.

NOTE1: When the UE has no PDU sessions over non-3GPP access, or the UE moves all the PDU sessions over a non-3GPP access to a 3GPP access, the UE and the AMF need not initiate de-registration over the non-3GPP access.

The AMF shall provide the UE with a non-3GPP de-registration timer.

When the AMF enters the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED for 3GPP access, the AMF shall delete the stored UE radio capability information or the UE radio capability ID, if any.

When upper layers indicate that emergency services are no longer required, the UE if still registered for emergency services, may perform UE-initiated de-registration procedure followed by a re-registration to regain normal services, if the UE is in or moves to a suitable cell.

If the UE is registered for onboarding services in SNPN, after completing the configuration of one or more entries of the "list of subscriber data", the UE should perform UE-initiated de-registration procedure. To prevent the UE registered for onboarding services in SNPN from staying on the ON-SNPN or to prevent a UE whose subscription only allows for configuration of SNPN subscription parameters in PLMN via the user plane, from staying registered indefinitely, when an implementation specific timer expires:

- if the AMF considers that the UE is in 5GMM-IDLE, the AMF shall locally de-registers the UE; or

- if the UE is in 5GMM-CONNECTED, the AMF shall initiate the network-initiated de-registration procedure (see subclause 5.5.2.3).

NOTE2: The value of the implementation specific timer for onboarding services needs to be large enough to allow a UE to complete the configuration of one or more entries of the "list of subscriber data" taking into consideration that configuration of SNPN subscription parameters in PLMN via the user plane or onboarding services in SNPN involves third party entities outside of the operator's network.

NOTE3: How to determine the completion of the configuration of one or more entries of the "list of subscriber data" is UE implementation specific.

If the de-registration procedure is not due to switch off and upper layers request establishing an emergency PDU session before the de-registration procedure has been completed, the UE shall abort the deregistration procedure, perform local de-registration and initiate a registration procedure.

If the UE in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode determines to obtain service on a higher priority PLMN due to SOR, then based on the conditions as specified in 3GPP TS 23.122 [5] annex C, where applicable, the UE shall perform UE-initiated de-registration procedure.

If the UE is registered for disaster roaming services, and the UE receives an indication of whether disaster roaming is enabled in the UE set to "Disaster roaming is disabled in the UE" in a UE parameters update transparent container, the UE shall perform UE-initiated de-registration procedure.

5.5.2.2 UE-initiated de-registration procedure

5.5.2.2.1 UE-initiated de-registration procedure initiation

The de-registration procedure is initiated by the UE by sending a DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message (see example in figure5.5.2.2.1). The De-registration type IE included in the message indicates whether the de-registration procedure is due to a "switch off" or not. The access type included in the message indicates whether the de-registration procedure is:

a) for 5GS services over 3GPP access when the UE is registered over 3GPP access;

b) for 5GS services over non-3GPP access when the UE is registered over non-3GPP access; or

c) for 3GPP access, non-3GPP access or both when the UE is registered in the same PLMN over both accesses.

If the UE has a valid 5G-GUTI, the UE shall populate the 5GS mobile identity IE with the valid 5G-GUTI. If the UE does not have a valid 5G-GUTI, the UE shall populate the 5GS mobile identity IE with its SUCI as follows:

a) if timer T3519 is not running, generate a fresh SUCI as specified in 3GPPTS33.501[24], send a DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message with the SUCI, start timer T3519 and store the value of the SUCI sent in the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message; and

b) if timer T3519 is running, send a DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message with the stored SUCI.

If the UE does not have a valid 5G-GUTI and it does not have a valid SUCI, then the UE shall populate the5GS mobile identity IE with its PEI.

If the de-registration request is not due to switch off and the UE is in the state 5GMM-REGISTERED or 5GMM-REGISTERED-INITIATED, timer T3521 shall be started in the UE after the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message has been sent. The UE shall enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED-INITIATED.

If the UE is to be switched off, the UE shall try for a period of 5 seconds to send the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message. During this period, the UE may be switched off as soon as the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message has been sent.



Figure5.5.2.2.1.1: UE-initiated de-registration procedure

5.5.2.2.2 UE-initiated de-registration procedure completion

When the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message is received by the AMF, the AMF shall send a DEREGISTRATION ACCEPT message to the UE, if the De-registration type IE does not indicate "switch off". Otherwise, the procedure is completed when the AMF receives the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message.

The UE, when receiving the DEREGISTRATION ACCEPT message, shall stop timer T3521, stop timer T3519 if running, and delete any stored SUCI.

5.5.2.2.3 UE-initiated de-registration procedure completion for 5GS services over 3GPP access

If the access type in the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message indicates that the de-registration procedure is for 3GPP access, the AMF shall trigger the SMF to perform a local release of the PDU session(s) established over 3GPP access, if any, for this UE. The UE shall perform a local release of the PDU session(s) established over 3GPP access, if any. If a PDU session is associated with one or more MBS sessions, the UE shall locally leave the associated MBS sessions and the SMF shall consider the UE as removed from the associated MBS sessions. If there is an MA PDU session with user plane resources established on both 3GPP access and non-3GPP access in the same PLMN or in different PLMNs, the AMF shall trigger SMF to perform release of user plane resources on 3GPP access, and the UE shall consider the user plane resources on 3GPP access as released. If there is an MA PDU session with user plane resources established on 3GPP access only, the AMF shall trigger the SMF to perform a local release of the MA PDU session, and the UE shall perform a local release of the MA PDU session. The UE is marked as inactive in the AMF for 5GS services for 3GPP access. The AMF shall enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED for 3GPP access.

If the UE supports N1 mode only and the de-registration request is not due to switch off, then:

a) if the de-registration procedure was performed due to disabling of 5GS services, then the UE shall enter the 5GMM-NULL state for 3GPP access;

b) otherwise, the UE shall enter the 5GMM-DEREGISTERED state for 3GPP access.

NOTE: Case b) is applicable when the UE is also registered over non-3GPP access.

If the access type indicates that the de-registration procedure is for 3GPP access or for 3GPP access and non-3GPP access, and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, it shall additionally proceed as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15], subclause5.5.2.2.2, for the case when the UE receives an EMM message DETACH ACCEPT. Furthermore, if the UE supports A/Gb or Iu mode, it shall disable the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access.

5.5.2.2.4 UE-initiated de-registration procedure completion for 5GS services over non-3GPP access

If the access type in the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST indicates that the de-registration procedure is for non-3GPP access, the AMF shall trigger SMF to perform a local release of the PDU session(s) established over non-3GPP access, if any, for this UE. The UE shall perform a local release of the PDU session(s) established over non-3GPP access, if any. If there is an MA PDU session with user plane resources established on both 3GPP access and non-3GPP access in the same PLMN or in different PLMNs, the AMF shall trigger SMF to perform release of user plane resources on non-3GPP access, and the UE shall consider the user plane resources on non-3GPP access as released. If there is an MA PDU session with a PDN connection as a user-plane resource and user plane resources established on non-3GPP access, the AMF shall trigger SMF to perform release of user plane resources on non-3GPP access, and the UE shall consider the user plane resources on non-3GPP access as released. If the UE has an MA PDU session with user plane resources established on non-3GPP access only, the AMF shall trigger the SMF to perform a local release of the MA PDU session, and the UE shall perform a local release of the MA PDU session. The UE is marked as inactive in the AMF for 5GS services for non-3GPP access. The AMF shall enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED over non-3GPP access.

If the de-registration request is not due to switch off, the UE shall:

a) if the de-registration procedure was performed due to disabling of 5GS services, enter the 5GMM-NULL state for non-3GPP access;

b) otherwise, enter the 5GMM-DEREGISTERED state for non-3GPP access.

NOTE: Case b) is applicable when the UE is also registered over 3GPP access.

5.5.2.2.5 UE-initiated de-registration procedure completion for 5GS services over both 3GPP access and non-3GPP access

If the access type in the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST indicates that the de-registration procedure is for both 3GPP access and non-3GPP access when the UE is registered in the same PLMN over both accesses, the descriptions for UE-initiated de-registration procedure completion for 5GS services over 3GPP access and over non-3GPP access, as specified in subclauses5.5.2.2.3 and 5.5.2.2.4, shall be followed.

5.5.2.2.6 Abnormal cases in the UE

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a) Lower layer failure or release of the N1 NAS signalling connection before reception of DEREGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

 The de-registration procedure shall be aborted and the UE proceeds as follows:

1) if the de-registration procedure was performed due to disabling of 5GS services, the UE shall enter the 5GMM-NULL state; or

2) if the de-registration type "normal de-registration" was requested for reasons other than disabling of 5GS services, the UE shall enter the 5GMM-DEREGISTERED state.

b) The lower layers indicate that the access attempt is barred.

 The UE shall not start the de-registration signalling procedure. The UE stays in the current serving cell and applies the normal cell reselection process. Receipt of the access barred indication shall not trigger the selection of a different core network type (EPC or 5GCN).

 The UE may perform a local de-registration either immediately or after an implementation-dependent time.

 The de-registration signalling procedure is started, if still needed, when the lower layers indicate that the barring is alleviated for the access category with which the access attempt was associated.

ba) The lower layers indicate that:

1) access barring is applicable for all access categories except categories 0 and 2 and the access category with which the access attempt was associated is other than 0 and 2; or

2) access barring is applicable for all access categories except category 0 and the access category with which the access attempt was associated is other than 0.

 If the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message has not been sent, the UE shall proceed as specified for case b. If the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message has been sent, the UE shall proceed as specified for case a.

c) T3521 timeout.

 If the de-registration procedure was performed based on conditions specified in 3GPPTS23.122[5] annexC, on the expiry of timer T3521 the de-registration procedure shall be aborted and the UE shall locally release the established N1 NAS signalling connection and enter the 5GMM-DEREGISTERED state.

Otherwise, on the first four expiries of the timer, the UE shall retransmit the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message and shall reset and restart timer T3521. On the fifth expiry of timer T3521, the de-registration procedure shall be aborted and the UE proceeds as follows:

1) if the de-registration procedure was performed due to disabling of 5GS services, the UE shall enter the 5GMM-NULL state; or

2) if the de-registration type "normal de-registration" was requested for reasons other than disabling of 5GS services, the UE shall enter the 5GMM-DEREGISTERED state.

d) De-registration procedure collision.

 De-registration containing de-registration type "switch off":

- If the UE receives a DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message before the UE-initiated de-registration procedure has been completed, this message shall be ignored and the UE-initiated de-registration procedure shall continue.

 Otherwise:

- If the UE receives a DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message before the UE-initiated de-registration procedure has been completed, it shall treat the message as specified in subclause5.5.2.3.2 with the following modification:

- If the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message received by the UE contains de-registration type "re-registration required", and the UE-initiated de-registration procedure is with de-registration type "normal de-registration", the UE need not initiate the registration procedure for initial registration.

e) De-registration and 5GMM common procedure collision.

 De-registration containing de-registration type "switch off":

- If the UE receives a message used in a 5GMM common procedure before the de-registration procedure has been completed, this message shall be ignored and the de-registration procedure shall continue.

 Otherwise:

- If the UE receives a message used in a 5GMM common procedure before the de-registration procedure has been completed, both the 5GMM common procedure and the de-registration procedure shall continue; or

- If the UE receives a DL NAS TRANSPORT message containing payload container type "Service-level-AA container" before the de-registration procedure has been completed, this message shall be ignored and the de-registration procedure shall continue.

f) Change in the current TAI.

 If that the current TAI is not in the stored TAI list before the UE-initiated de-registration procedure is completed, the UE proceeds as follows:

1) if the de-registration procedure was initiated for reasons other than removal of the USIM, the UE is to be switched off or due to the last Tsor-cm timer expiry or stopped (see 3GPPTS23.122[5]), the de-registration procedure shall be aborted and re-initiated after successfully performing a registration procedure for mobility or periodic update used for mobility (i.e. the 5GS registration type IE set to "mobility registration updating" in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message); or

2) if the de-registration procedure was initiated due to removal of the USIM or the UE is to be switched off or due to the last Tsor-cm timer expiry or stopped (see 3GPPTS23.122[5]), the UE shall abort the de-registration procedure, perform a local de-registration and enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.

g) Transmission failure of DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message indication with change in the current TAI.

 If the current TAI is not in the TAI list, the UE proceeds as follows:

1) if the de-registration procedure was initiated for reasons other than removal of the USIM ,the UE is to be switched off or due to the last Tsor-cm timer expiry or stopped (see 3GPPTS23.122[5]), the de-registration procedure shall be aborted and re-initiated after successfully performing a registration procedure for mobility or periodic update; or

2) if the de-registration procedure was initiated due to removal of the USIM or the UE is to be switched off or due to the last Tsor-cm timer expiry or stopped (see 3GPPTS23.122[5]), the UE shall abort the de-registration procedure, perform a local de-registration and enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.

 If the current TAI is still part of the TAI list, the UE shall restart the de-registration procedure.

h) Transmission failure of DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message indication without change in the current TAI.

 The UE shall restart the de-registration procedure.

i) The lower layers indicate that the RRC connection has been suspended.

 De-registration containing de-registration type "switch off":

- The UE may perform a local de-registration either immediately or after an implementation-dependent time.

 Otherwise:

- The UE shall wait for an implementation-dependent time and shall restart the de-registration procedure, if still needed, upon expiry of the implementation-dependent time.

For the cases a, f, g and i:

- Timer T3521 shall be stopped if still running.

5.5.2.2.7 Abnormal cases in the network side

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a) De-registration request received in a cell belonging to an SNPN with a non-globally-unique SNPN identity for which the UE has no valid subscription

 If the UE initiates a de-registration procedure in a cell belonging to an SNPN with a non-globally-unique SNPN identity for which the UE has no valid subscription, and the de-registration procedure is not due to "switch off", the network shall initiate the de-registration procedure. The AMF shall send a DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message including the 5GMM cause #74 "Temporarily not authorized for this SNPN".

b) De-registration request received in a cell belonging to an SNPN with a globally-unique SNPN identity for which the UE has no valid subscription

 If the UE initiates a de-registration procedure in a cell belonging to an SNPN with a globally-unique SNPN identity for which the UE has no valid subscription, and the de-registration procedure is not due to "switch off", the network shall initiate the de-registration procedure. The AMF shall send a DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message including the 5GMM cause #75 "Permanently not authorized for this SNPN".

c) De-registration request received in a CAG cell and none of the CAG ID broadcasted by the CAG cell is included in the UE's "allowed CAG list" for the current PLMN

 If the UE initiates a de-registration procedure in a CAG cell and none of the CAG ID broadcasted by the CAG cell is included in the UE's "allowed CAG list" for the current PLMN and the de-registration procedure is not due to "switch off", the AMF shall initiate the de-registration procedure. The AMF shall send a DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message including the 5GMM cause #76 "Not authorized for this CAG or authorized for CAG cells only" if the UE supports CAG. Otherwise, the network shall operate as described in bulletg) of subclause5.5.2.3.5.

d) De-registration request received in a non-CAG cell from a UE whose "CAG information list" includes an entry associated with the current PLMN, where the entry contains an "indication that the UE is only allowed to access 5GS via CAG cells"

 If the UE initiates a de-registration procedure in a non-CAG cell from a UE whose "CAG information list" includes an entry associated with the current PLMN, where the entry contains an "indication that the UE is only allowed to access 5GS via CAG cells" and the de-registration procedure is not due to "switch off", the AMF shall initiate the de-registration procedure. The AMF shall send a DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message including the 5GMM cause #76 "Not authorized for this CAG or authorized for CAG cells only" if the UE supports CAG. Otherwise, the network shall operate as described in bulletg) of subclause5.5.2.3.5.

e) De-registration and registration procedure for initial registration collision

 If the network receives a REGISTRATION REQUEST message indicating either "initial registration" or "emergency registration" in the 5GS registration type IE from the UE before the UE-initiated de-registration procedure, which is not due to switch off, has been completed, the network shall abort the de-registration procedure and the registration procedure shall be progressed.

5.5.2.3 Network-initiated de-registration procedure

5.5.2.3.1 Network-initiated de-registration procedure initiation

The network initiates the de-registration procedure by sending a DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message to the UE (see example in figure5.5.2.3.1.1).

NOTE1: If the AMF performs a local de-registration, it will inform the UE with a 5GMM messages (e.g. SERVICE REJECT message or REGISTRATION REJECT message) with 5GMM cause #10 "implicitly de-registered" only when the UE initiates a 5GMM procedure.

The network may include a 5GMM cause IE to specify the reason for the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message. The network shall start timer T3522. The network shall indicate whether re-registration is needed or not in the De-registration type IE. The network shall also indicate via the access type whether the de-registration procedure is:

a) for 3GPP access only;

b) for non-3GPP access only; or

c) for 3GPP access, non-3GPP access or both when the UE is registered in the same PLMN for both accesses.

If the network de-registration is triggered due to network slice-specific authentication and authorization failure or revocation as specified in subclause4.6.2.4, then the network shall set the 5GMM cause value to #62 "No network slices available" in the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message. In addition, if the UE supports extended rejected NSSAI, the AMF shall include the Extended rejected NSSAI IE in the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message; otherwise the AMF shall include the Rejected NSSAI IE in the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If the UE supports extended rejected NSSAI and the network de-registration is triggered due to mobility management based network slice admission control as specified in subclause4.6.2.5, then the network shall set the 5GMM cause value to #62 "No network slices available" in the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message. In addition, the network may include a back-off timer value for each S-NSSAI with the rejection cause "S-NSSAI not available due to maximum number of UEs reached" in the Extended rejected NSSAI IE of the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message.

If the network de-registration is triggered for a UE supporting CAG due to CAG restrictions, the network shall set the 5GMM cause value to #76 "Not authorized for this CAG or authorized for CAG cells only" and should include the "CAG information list" in the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE in the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message.

NOTE2: If the UE supports extended CAG information list, the CAG information list can be included either in the CAG information list IE or Extended CAG information list IE.

If the network de-registration is triggered for a UE not supporting CAG due to CAG restrictions, the network shall operate as described in bulletg) of subclause5.5.2.3.5.

If the network de-registration is triggered because the network determines that the UE is in a location where the network is not allowed to operate, see 3GPPTS23.502[9], the network shall set the 5GMM cause value in the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message to #78 "PLMN not allowed to operate at the present UE location".

If the network de-registration is triggered due to:

a) an unsuccessful outcome of an ongoing UUAA-MM procedure;

b) an UUAA revocation notification received from the UAS-NF for a UE supporting UAS service requesting UAS services; or

c) the UE not allowed to use UAS services via 5GS due to a change of the aerial UE subscription information,

then the network shall set the 5GMM cause value in the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message to #79 "UAS services not allowed".

NOTE3: If the UE supporting UAS service has requested other services than UAS services, or if there are other ongoing network slice-specific authentication and authorization on pending NSSAIs, it is then an operator policy or configuration decision whether to keep the UE supporting UAS service registered to the network, but that UE supporting UAS services is not allowed to access UAS services via 5GS as specified in 3GPPTS23.256[6AB].

If the network de-registration is triggered for a UE supporting MINT due to a disaster condition no longer being applicable in the current location of the UE, the network shall set the 5GMM cause value to #11 "PLMN not allowed" and may include a disaster return wait range in the Disaster return wait range IE in the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message.

The AMF shall trigger the SMF to release locally the PDU session(s) over the indicated access(es), if any, for the UE and enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED-INITIATED. If a PDU session is associated with one or more MBS sessions, the SMF shall consider the UE as removed from the associated MBS sessions.



Figure5.5.2.3.1.1: Network-initiated de-registration procedure

5.5.2.3.2 Network-initiated de-registration procedure completion by the UE

Upon receiving the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message, if the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message indicates "re-registration required" and the de-registration request is for 3GPP access, the UE shall perform a local release of the PDU sessions over 3GPP access, if any. If a PDU session is associated with one or more MBS sessions, the UE shall locally leave the associated MBS sessions. If there is an MA PDU session with user plane resources established on both 3GPP access and non-3GPP access in the same PLMN or in different PLMNs, the UE shall perform a local release of the user plane resources on 3GPP access. If there is an MA PDU session with user plane resources established on 3GPP access only, the UE shall perform a local release of the MA PDU session. If the MA PDU session is associated with one or more MBS sessions, the UE shall locally leave the associated MBS sessions. The UE shall stop the timer(s) T3346, T3396, T3584, T3585 and 5GSM back-off timer(s) not related to congestion control (see subclause6.2.12), if running. If the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall also stop the ESM back-off timer(s) not related to congestion control (see subclause6.3.6 in 3GPPTS24.301[15]), if running. The UE shall send a DEREGISTRATION ACCEPT message to the network and enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED for 3GPP access. Furthermore, the UE shall, after the completion of the de-registration procedure, and the release of the existing NAS signalling connection, if any Tsor-cm timer(s) were running and have stopped, the UE shall attempt to obtain service on a higher priority PLMN (see 3GPPTS23.122[5]) on 3GPP access, otherwise initiate an initial registration. The UE should also re-establish any previously established PDU sessions over 3GPP access. For any previously established MA PDU sessions with user plane resources established on both accesses the UE should also re-establish the user plane resources over 3GPP access, and for any previously established MA PDU sessions with user plane resources established only on the 3GPP access the UE should re-establish the MA PDU session over 3GPP access.

Upon receiving the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message, if the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message indicates "re-registration required" and the de-registration request is for non-3GPP access, the UE shall perform a local release of the PDU sessions over non-3GPP access, if any. If there is an MA PDU session with user plane resources established on both 3GPP access and non-3GPP access in the same PLMN or in different PLMNs, the UE shall perform a local release of the user plane resources on non-3GPP access. If there is an MA PDU session with a PDN connection as a user-plane resource and user plane resources established on non-3GPP access, the UE shall perform a local release of the user plane resources on non-3GPP access. If there is an MA PDU session with user plane resources established on non-3GPP access only, the UE shall perform a local release of the MA PDU session. The UE shall stop the timer(s) T3346, T3396, T3584 and T3585, if it is running. The UE shall send a DEREGISTRATION ACCEPT message to the network and enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED for non-3GPP access. Furthermore, the UE shall, after the completion of the de-registration procedure, and the release of the existing NAS signalling connection, initiate an initial registration over non-3GPP. The UE should also re-establish any previously established PDU sessions over non-3GPP access. For any previously established MA PDU sessions with user plane resources established on both accesses the UE should also re-establish the user plane resources over non-3GPP access, and for any previously established MA PDU sessions with user plane resources established only on the non-3GPP access the UE should re-establish the MA PDU session over non-3GPP access, and for any previously established MA PDU sessions with a PDN connection as a user-plane resource and user plane resources established on non-3GPP access the UE should re-establish the user plane resources over non-3GPP access.

Upon receiving the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message, if the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message indicates "re-registration required" and the de-registration request is for both 3GPP access and non-3GPP access when the UE is registered in the same PLMN for both accesses, the UE shall perform a local release of the MA PDU sessions and PDU sessions over both 3GPP access and non-3GPP access, if any. If an MA PDU session or a PDU sessions is associated with one or more MBS sessions, the UE shall locally leave the associated MBS sessions. The UE shall stop the timer(s) T3346, T3396, T3584 and T3585, if it is running. The UE shall send a DEREGISTRATION ACCEPT message to the network and enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED for both 3GPP access and non-3GPP access. Furthermore, the UE shall, after the completion of the de-registration procedure, and the release of the existing NAS signalling connection, if any Tsor-cm timer(s) were running and have stopped, the UE shall attempt to obtain service on a higher priority PLMN (see 3GPPTS23.122[5]) on 3GPP access, otherwise initiate an initial registration over both 3GPP access and non-3GPP access. The UE should also re-establish any previously established PDU sessions over both 3GPP access and non-3GPP access. For any previously established MA PDU sessions the UE should also re-establish the MA PDU session and the user plane resources which were established previously.

NOTE1: When the de-registration type indicates "re-registration required", user interaction is necessary in some cases when the UE cannot re-establish the PDU session (s), if any, automatically.

Upon receiving the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message, if the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message indicates "re-registration not required" and the de-registration request is for 3GPP access, the UE shall perform a local release of the PDU sessions over 3GPP access, if any. If a PDU session is associated with one or more MBS sessions, the UE shall locally leave the associated MBS sessions. If there is an MA PDU session with user plane resources established on both 3GPP access and non-3GPP access in the same PLMN or in different PLMNs, the UE shall perform a local release of the user plane resources on 3GPP access. If there is an MA PDU session with user plane resources established on 3GPP access only, the UE shall perform a local release of the MA PDU session. If the MA PDU session is associated with one or more MBS sessions, the UE shall locally leave the associated MBS sessions. The UE shall send a DEREGISTRATION ACCEPT message to the network and enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED for 3GPP access.

Upon receiving the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message, if the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message indicates "re-registration not required" and the de-registration request is for non-3GPP access, the UE shall perform a local release of the PDU sessions over non-3GPP access, if any. If there is an MA PDU session with user plane resources established on both 3GPP access and non-3GPP access in the same PLMN or in different PLMNs, the UE shall perform a local release of the user plane resources on non-3GPP access. If there is an MA PDU session with a PDN connection as a user-plane resource and user plane resources established on non-3GPP access, the UE shall perform a local release of the user plane resources on non-3GPP access. If there is an MA PDU session with user plane resources established on non-3GPP access only, the UE shall perform a local release of the MA PDU session. The UE shall send a DEREGISTRATION ACCEPT message to the network and enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED for non-3GPP access.

Upon receiving the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message, if the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message indicates "re-registration not required" and the de-registration request is for both 3GPP access and non-3GPP access when the UE is registered in the same PLMN for both accesses, the UE shall perform a local release of the MA PDU sessions and PDU sessions over both 3GPP access and non-3GPP access, if any. If an MA PDU session or a PDU session is associated with one or more MBS sessions, the UE shall locally leave the associated MBS sessions. The UE shall send a DEREGISTRATION ACCEPT message to the network and enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED for both 3GPP access and non-3GPP access.

Upon receiving the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message, if the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message includes the rejected NSSAI, the UE takes the following actions based on the rejection cause in the rejected S-NSSAI(s):

"S-NSSAI not available in the current PLMN or SNPN"

 The UE shall store the rejected S-NSSAI(s) in the rejected NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN as specified in subclause4.6.2.2 and shall not attempt to use this S-NSSAI in the current PLMN or SNPN until switching off the UE, the UICC containing the USIM is removed, or the rejected S-NSSAI(s) are removed as described in subclause4.6.2.2.

"S-NSSAI not available in the current registration area"

 The UE shall store the rejected S-NSSAI(s) in the rejected NSSAI for the current registration area as described in subclause4.6.2.2 and shall not attempt to use this S-NSSAI(s) in the current registration area until switching off the UE, the UE moving out of the current registration area, the UICC containing the USIM is removed, an entry of the "list of subscriber data" with the SNPN identity of the current SNPN is updated, or the rejected S-NSSAI(s) are removed as described in subclause4.6.2.2.

"S-NSSAI not available due to the failed or revoked network slice-specific authentication and authorization"

 The UE shall store the rejected S-NSSAI(s) in the rejected NSSAI for the failed or revoked NSSAA as specified in subclause4.6.2.2 and shall not attempt to use this S-NSSAI in the current PLMN or SNPN over any access until switching off the UE, the UICC containing the USIM is removed, the entry of the "list of subscriber data" with the SNPN identity of the current SNPN is updated, or the rejected S-NSSAI(s) are removed or deleted as described in subclause4.6.1 and 4.6.2.2.

"S-NSSAI not available due to maximum number of UEs reached"

 The UE shall add the rejected S-NSSAI(s) in the rejected NSSAI for the maximum number of UEs reached as specified in subclause4.6.2.2 and shall not attempt to use this S-NSSAI in the current PLMN or SNPN over the current access until switching off the UE, the UICC containing the USIM is removed, the entry of the "list of subscriber data" with the SNPN identity of the current SNPN is updated, or the rejected S-NSSAI(s) are removed as described in subclause4.6.2.2.

 If there is one or more S-NSSAIs in the rejected NSSAI with the rejection cause "S-NSSAI not available due to maximum number of UEs reached", then for each S-NSSAI, the UE shall behave as follows:

a) stop the timer T3526 associated with the S-NSSAI, if running;

b) start the timer T3526 with:

1) the back-off timer value received along with the S-NSSAI, if a back-off timer value is received along with the S-NSSAI that is neither zero nor deactivated; or

2) an implementation specific back-off timer value, if no back-off timer value is received along with the S-NSSAI; and

c) remove the S-NSSAI from the rejected NSSAI for the maximum number of UEs reached when the timer T3526 associated with the S-NSSAI expires.

Upon sending a DEREGISTRATION ACCEPT message, the UE shall delete the rejected NSSAI as specified in subclause4.6.2.2.

Regardless of the 5GMM cause value received in the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message,

- if the UE receives the Forbidden TAI(s) for the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" IE in the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message and if the TAI(s) included in the IE is not part of the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming", the UE shall store the TAI(s) included in the IE, if not already stored, into the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" and remove the TAI(s) from the stored TAI list if present; and

- if the UE receives the Forbidden TAI(s) for the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service" IE in the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message and if the TAI(s) included in the IE is not part of the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service", the UE shall store the TAI(s) included in the IE, if not already stored, into the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service" and remove the TAI(s) from the stored TAI list if present.

If the de-registration type indicates "re-registration required", then the UE shall ignore the 5GMM cause IE if received.

If the de-registration type indicates "re-registration not required", the UE shall take the actions depending on the received 5GMM cause value:

#3 (Illegal UE);

#6 (Illegal ME)

 The message was received via 3GPP access and the UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2) and shall delete any 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and ngKSI.

- In case of PLMN, the UE shall consider the USIM as invalid for 5GS services until switching off, the UICC containing the USIM is removed or the timer T3245 expires as described in clause 5.3.19a.1;

 In case of SNPN, if the UE is not registered for onboarding services in SNPN and the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the UE shall consider the entry of the "list of subscriber data" with the SNPN identity of the current SNPN as invalid until the UE is switched off, the entry is updated or the timer T3245 expires as described in clause 5.3.19a.2. In case of SNPN, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the UE shall consider the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" as invalid for 3GPP access until the UE is switched off, the entry is updated or the timer T3245 expires as described in clause 5.3.19a.2. Additionally, if EAP based primary authentication and key agreement procedure using EAP-AKA' or 5G AKA based primary authentication and key agreement procedure was performed in the current SNPN, the UE shall consider the USIM as invalid for the current SNPN until switching off, the UICC containing the USIM is removed or the timer T3245 expires as described in clause 5.3.19a.2.

 If the UE is not registered for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall delete the list of equivalent PLMNs (if any) and shall enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.NO-SUPI.

 If the UE is not registered for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall delete the 5GMM parameters stored in non-volatile memory of the ME as specified in annexC.

 If the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall handle the EMM parameters EMM state, EPS update status, 4G-GUTI, TAI list and eKSI as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] for the case when a DETACH REQUEST is received with the EMM cause with the same value and with detach type set to "re-attach not required". The USIM shall be considered as invalid also for non-EPS services until switching off or the UICC containing the USIM is removed or the timer T3245 expires as described in clause 5.3.7a in 3GPP TS 24.301 [15].

 If the UE is registered for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall reset the registration attempt counter, store the SNPN identity in the "permanently forbidden SNPNs" list for onboarding services, enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH, and perform an SNPN selection or an SNPN selection for onboarding services according to 3GPPTS23.122[5].

 If the UE also supports the registration procedure over the other access, the UE shall in addition handle 5GMM parameters and 5GMM state for this access, as described for this 5GMM cause value.

#7 (5GS services not allowed).

 The UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2) and shall delete any 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and ngKSI.

 In case of PLMN, the UE shall consider the USIM as invalid for 5GS services until switching off, the UICC containing the USIM is removed or the timer T3245 expires as described in clause 5.3.19a.1;

 In case of SNPN, if the UE is not registered for onboarding services in SNPN and the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the UE shall consider the entry of the "list of subscriber data" with the SNPN identity of the current SNPN as invalid for 5GS services until the UE is switched off, or the entry is updated or the timer T3245 expires as described in clause 5.3.19a.2. In case of SNPN, if the UE is not registered for onboarding services in SNPN and the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the UE shall consider the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" as invalid for 3GPP access until the UE is switched off, the entry is updated or the timer T3245 expires as described in clause 5.3.19a.2. Additionally, if EAP based primary authentication and key agreement procedure using EAP-AKA' or 5G AKA based primary authentication and key agreement procedure was performed in the current SNPN, the UE shall consider the USIM as invalid for the current SNPN until switching off, the UICC containing the USIM is removed or the timer T3245 expires as described in clause 5.3.19a.2.

 If the UE is not registered for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.NO-SUPI.

 If the UE is not registered for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall delete the 5GMM parameters stored in non-volatile memory of the ME as specified in annexC.

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall handle the EMM parameters EMM state, EPS update status, 4G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and eKSI as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] for the case when a DETACH REQUEST is received with the EMM cause with the same value and with detach type set to "re-attach not required".

 If the UE is registered for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall reset the registration attempt counter, store the SNPN identity in the "permanently forbidden SNPNs" list for onboarding services, enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH, and perform an SNPN selection or an SNPN selection for onboarding services according to 3GPPTS23.122[5].

 If the UE also supports the registration procedure over the other access, the UE shall in addition handle 5GMM parameters and 5GMM state for this access, as described for this 5GMM cause value.

#11 (PLMN not allowed).

 This cause value received from a cell belonging to an SNPN is considered as an abnormal case and the behaviour of the UE is specified in subclause5.5.2.3.4.

 The UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2) and shall delete any 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and ngKSI. The UE shall delete the list of equivalent PLMNs, shall reset the registration attempt counter. For 3GPP access the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH, and for non-3GPP access the UE shall enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE.

 The UE shall store the PLMN identity in the forbidden PLMN list as specified in subclause5.3.13A and if the UE is configured to use timer T3245 then the UE shall start timer T3245 and proceed as described in clause 5.3.19a.1.

 For 3GPP access the UE shall perform a PLMN selection according to 3GPPTS23.122[5], and for non-3GPP access the UE shall perform network selection as defined in 3GPPTS24.502[18].

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall handle the EMM parameters EMM state, EPS update status, 4G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list, eKSI and attach attempt counter as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] for the case when a DETACH REQUEST is received with the EMM cause with the same value and with detach type set to "re-attach not required".

 If the UE also supports the registration procedure over the other access to the same PLMN, the UE shall in addition handle 5GMM parameters and 5GMM state for this access, as described for this 5GMM cause value.

 If the UE receives the Disaster return wait range IE in the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message and the UE supports MINT, the UE shall delete the disaster return wait range stored in the ME, if any, and store the disaster return wait range included in the Disaster return wait range IE in the ME.

#12 (Tracking area not allowed).

 The UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2) and shall delete 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and ngKSI. The UE shall reset the registration attempt counter and shall enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE.

 If the UE is not operating in SNPN access operation mode, the UE shall store the current TAI in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service". Otherwise, the UE shall store the current TAI in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service" for the current SNPN and, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription.

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall handle the EMM parameters, EMM state, EPS update status, 4G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list, eKSI and attach attempt counter as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] for the case when a DETACH REQUEST is received with the EMM cause with the same value and with detach type set to "re-attach not required".

#13 (Roaming not allowed in this tracking area).

 The UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2) and shall delete 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and ngKSI. The UE shall delete the list of equivalent PLMNs (if available), reset the registration attempt counter. For 3GPP access the UE shall change to state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH, and for non-3GPP access the UE shall change to state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE.

 If the UE is not operating in SNPN access operation mode, the UE shall store the current TAI in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming". Otherwise, the UE shall store the current TAI in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" for the current SNPN and, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription.

 For 3GPP access the UE shall perform a PLMN selection or SNPN selection according to 3GPPTS23.122[5], and for non-3GPP access the UE shall perform network selection as defined in 3GPPTS24.502[18].

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall handle the EMM parameters EMM state, EPS update status, 4G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list, eKSI and attach attempt counter as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] for the case when a DETACH REQUEST is received with the EMM cause with the same value and with detach type set to "re-attach not required".

#15 (No suitable cells in tracking area).

 The UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2) and shall delete any 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and ngKSI. The UE shall reset the registration attempt counter and shall enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE.

 If the UE is not operating in SNPN access operation mode, the UE shall store the current TAI in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming". Otherwise the UE shall store the current TAI in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" for the current SNPN and, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription.

 The UE shall search for a suitable cell in another tracking area according to 3GPPTS38.304[28] or 3GPPTS36.304[25C].

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall handle the EMM parameters EMM state, EPS update status, 4G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list, eKSI and attach attempt counter as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] for the case when a DETACH REQUEST is received with the EMM cause with the same value and with detach type set to "re-attach not required".

 If received over non-3GPP access and de-registration request is for non-3GPP access only, the cause shall be considered as an abnormal case and the behaviour of the UE for this case is specified in subclause5.5.2.3.4.

#22 (Congestion).

 If the T3346 value IE is present in the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message and the value indicates that this timer is neither zero nor deactivated, the UE shall proceed as described below, otherwise it shall be considered as an abnormal case and the behaviour of the UE for this case is specified in subclause5.5.2.3.4.

 The UE shall stop timer T3346 if it is running, set the 5GS update status to 5U2 NOT UPDATED, reset the registration attempt counter and enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-REGISTRATION.

 The UE shall start timer T3346 with the value provided in the T3346 value IE.

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in the single-registration mode, the UE shall set the EPS update status to EU2 NOT UPDATED, reset the attach attempt counter and shall enter the state EMM-DEREGISTERED.

#27 (N1 mode not allowed).

 The UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2) and shall delete any 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and ngKSI. Additionally, the UE shall reset the registration attempt counter and shall enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE.

 The UE shall disable the N1 mode capability for both 3GPP access and non-3GPP access (see subclause4.9).

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall in addition set the EPS update status to EU3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED and shall delete any 4G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and eKSI. Additionally, the UE shall reset the attach attempt counter and enter the state EMM-DEREGISTERED.

#62 (No network slices available).

 The UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U2 NOT UPDATED and enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE or 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH. Additionally, the UE shall reset the registration attempt counter.

 The UE receiving the rejected NSSAI in the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message takes the following actions based on the rejection cause in the rejected S-NSSAI(s):

 "S-NSSAI not available in the current PLMN or SNPN"

 The UE shall store the rejected S-NSSAI(s) in the rejected NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN as specified in subclause4.6.2.2 and shall not attempt to use this S-NSSAI(s) in the current PLMN or SNPN until switching off the UE, the UICC containing the USIM is removed, an entry of the "list of subscriber data" with the SNPN identity of the current SNPN is updated, or the rejected S-NSSAI(s) are removed or deleted as described in subclause4.6.2.2.

 "S-NSSAI not available in the current registration area"

 The UE shall store the rejected S-NSSAI(s) in the rejected NSSAI for the current registration area as described in subclause4.6.2.2 and shall not attempt to use this S-NSSAI(s) in the current registration area until switching off the UE, the UE moving out of the current registration area, the UICC containing the USIM is removed, the entry of the "list of subscriber data" with the SNPN identity of the current SNPN is updated, or the rejected S-NSSAI(s) are removed or deleted as described in subclause4.6.2.2.

 "S-NSSAI not available due to the failed or revoked network slice-specific authentication and authorization"

 The UE shall store the rejected S-NSSAI(s) in the rejected NSSAI for the failed or revoked NSSAA as specified in subclause4.6.2.2 and shall not attempt to use this S-NSSAI in the current PLMN or SNPN over any access until switching off the UE, the UICC containing the USIM is removed, the entry of the "list of subscriber data" with the SNPN identity of the current SNPN is updated, or the rejected S-NSSAI(s) are removed or deleted as described in subclause4.6.1 and 4.6.2.2.

 "S-NSSAI not available due to maximum number of UEs reached"

 The UE shall add the rejected S-NSSAI(s) in the rejected NSSAI for the maximum number of UEs reached as specified in subclause4.6.2.2 and shall not attempt to use this S-NSSAI in the current PLMN or SNPN over the current access until switching off the UE, the UICC containing the USIM is removed, the entry of the "list of subscriber data" with the SNPN identity of the current SNPN is updated, or the rejected S-NSSAI(s) are removed as described in subclause4.6.2.2.

 If the UE has an allowed NSSAI or configured NSSAI that contains S-NSSAI(s) which are not included in the rejected NSSAI, the UE may stay in the current serving cell, apply the normal cell reselection process and start an initial registration with a requested NSSAI that includes any S-NSSAI from the allowed NSSAI or the configured NSSAI that is not in the rejected NSSAI. Otherwise the UE may perform a PLMN selection or SNPN selection according to 3GPPTS23.122[5] and additionally, the UE may disable the N1 mode capability for the current PLMN or SNPN if the UE does not have an allowed NSSAI and each S-NSSAI in configured NSSAI, if available, was rejected with cause "S-NSSAI not available in the current PLMN or SNPN" or "S-NSSAI not available due to the failed or revoked network slice-specific authentication and authorization" or "S-NSSAI not available due to maximum number of UEs reached" as described in subclause4.9.

 If the UE has neither allowed NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN nor configured NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN and,

1) if at least one S-NSSAI in the default configured NSSAI is not rejected, the UE may stay in the current serving cell, apply the normal cell reselection process, and start an initial registration with a requested NSSAI with that default configured NSSAI; or

2) if all the S-NSSAI(s) in the default configured NSSAI are rejected and at least one S-NSSAI is rejected due to "S-NSSAI not available in the current registration area",

i) if the UE is not operating in SNPN access operation mode, the UE shall store the current TAI in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" and enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE; or

ii) if the UE is operating in SNPN access operation mode, the UE shall store the current TAI in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" for the current SNPN and enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE.

 Otherwise, the UE may perform a PLMN selection or SNPN selection according to 3GPPTS23.122[5] and additionally, the UE may disable the N1 mode capability for the current PLMN or SNPN if each S-NSSAI in the default configured NSSAI was rejected with cause "S-NSSAI not available in the current PLMN or SNPN" or "S-NSSAI not available due to the failed or revoked network slice-specific authentication and authorization" as described in subclause4.9.

 If the UE has neither allowed NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN nor configured NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN and has rejected NSSAI for the reached maximum number of UEs, and the UE wants to obtain services in the current serving cell without performing a PLMN selection or SNPN selection, the UE may stay in the current serving cell and attempt to use the rejected S-NSSAI(s) for the maximum number of UEs reached in the current serving cell after the rejected S-NSSAI(s) are removed as described in subclause4.6.2.2.

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall in addition set the EPS update status to EU2 NOT UPDATED, reset the attach attempt counter and enter the state EMM-DEREGISTERED.

#72 (Non-3GPP access to 5GCN not allowed).

 If received over non-3GPP access when the UE is registered over non-3GPP access, or received over 3GPP access and de-registration request is for non-3GPP access when the UE is registered in the same PLMN for both accesses, the UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2) and shall delete 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and ngKSI for non-3GPP access. Additionally, the UE shall reset the registration attempt counter and enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED for non-3GPP access.

NOTE2: The 5GMM sublayer states, the 5GMM parameters and the registration status are managed per access type independently, i.e. 3GPP access or non-3GPP access (see subclauses4.7.2 and 5.1.3).

 The UE shall disable the N1 mode capability for non-3GPP access (see subclause4.9.3).

 As an implementation option, if the UE is not currently registered over 3GPP access, the UE may enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH in order to perform a PLMN selection according to 3GPPTS23.122[5].

 If received over 3GPP access and de-registration request is for 3GPP access only, the cause shall be considered as an abnormal case and the behaviour of the UE for this case is specified in subclause5.5.2.3.4.

#74 (Temporarily not authorized for this SNPN).

 5GMM cause #74 is only applicable when received from a cell belonging to an SNPN. 5GMM cause #74 received from a cell not belonging to an SNPN is considered as an abnormal case and the behaviour of the UE is specified in subclause5.5.2.3.4.

 The UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2) and shall delete any 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and ngKSI. The UE shall reset the registration attempt counter and shall store the SNPN identity in the "temporarily forbidden SNPNs" list for the specific access type for which the message was received and, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription. If the UE is not registered for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH and perform an SNPN selection according to 3GPPTS23.122[5]. If the UE is registered for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH and perform an SNPN selection or an SNPN selection for onboarding services according to 3GPPTS23.122[5].

#75 (Permanently not authorized for this SNPN).

 5GMM cause #75 is only applicable when received from a cell belonging to an SNPN with a globally-unique SNPN identity. 5GMM cause #75 received from a cell not belonging to an SNPN or a cell belonging to an SNPN with a non-globally-unique SNPN identity is considered as an abnormal case and the behaviour of the UE is specified in subclause5.5.2.3.4.

 The UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2) and shall delete any 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and ngKSI. The UE shall reset the registration attempt counter and store the SNPN identity in the "permanently forbidden SNPNs" list for the specific access type for which the message was received and, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription. If the UE is not registered for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH and perform an SNPN selection according to 3GPPTS23.122[5]. If the UE is registered for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH and perform an SNPN selection or an SNPN selection for onboarding services according to 3GPPTS23.122[5].

#76 (Not authorized for this CAG or authorized for CAG cells only).

 This cause value received via non-3GPP access or from a cell belonging to an SNPN is considered as an abnormal case and the behaviour of the UE is specified in subclause5.5.2.3.4.

 The UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3.ROAMING NOT ALLOWED, store the 5GS update status according to clause5.1.3.2.2, and reset the registration attempt counter.

 If 5GMM cause #76 is received from:

1) a CAG cell, and if the UE receives a "CAG information list" in the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE included in the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message, the UE shall:

i) replace the "CAG information list" stored in the UE with the received CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE when received in the HPLMN or EHPLMN;

ii) replace the serving VPLMN's entry of the "CAG information list" stored in the UE with the serving VPLMN's entry of the received CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE when the UE receives the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE in a serving PLMN other than the HPLMN or EHPLMN; or

NOTE3: When the UE receives the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE in a serving PLMN other than the HPLMN or EHPLMN, entries of a PLMN other than the serving VPLMN, if any, in the received CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE are ignored.

iii) remove the serving VPLMN's entry of the "CAG information list" stored in the UE when the UE receives the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE in a serving PLMN other than the HPLMN or EHPLMN and the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE does not contain the serving VPLMN's entry.

 Otherwise, the UE shall delete the CAG-ID(s) of the cell from the "allowed CAG list" for the current PLMN. In the case the "allowed CAG list" for the current PLMN only contains a range of CAG-IDs, how the UE deletes the CAG-ID(s) of the cell from the "allowed CAG list" for the current PLMN is up to UE implementation. In addition:

i) if the entry in the "CAG information list" for the current PLMN does not include an "indication that the UE is only allowed to access 5GS via CAG cells" or if the entry in the "CAG information list" for the current PLMN includes an "indication that the UE is only allowed to access 5GS via CAG cells" and the updated "allowed CAG list" for the current PLMN includes one or more CAG-IDs, then the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE and shall search for a suitable cell according to 3GPPTS38.304[28] or 3GPPTS36.304[25C] with the updated "CAG information list"; or

ii) if the entry in the "CAG information list" for the current PLMN includes an "indication that the UE is only allowed to access 5GS via CAG cells" and the updated "allowed CAG list" for the current PLMN does not include any CAG-ID, then the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH and shall apply the PLMN selection process defined in 3GPP TS 23.122 [5] with the updated "CAG information list".

2) a non-CAG cell, and if the UE receives a "CAG information list" in the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE included in the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message, the UE shall:

i) replace the "CAG information list" stored in the UE with the received CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE when received in the HPLMN or EHPLMN;

ii) replace the serving VPLMN's entry of the "CAG information list" stored in the UE with the serving VPLMN's entry of the received CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE when the UE receives the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE in a serving PLMN other than the HPLMN or EHPLMN; or

NOTE4: When the UE receives the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE in a serving PLMN other than the HPLMN or EHPLMN, entries of a PLMN other than the serving VPLMN, if any, in the received CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE are ignored.

iii) remove the serving VPLMN's entry of the "CAG information list" stored in the UE when the UE receives the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE in a serving PLMN other than the HPLMN or EHPLMN and the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE does not contain the serving VPLMN's entry.

 Otherwise, the UE shall store an "indication that the UE is only allowed to access 5GS via CAG cells" in the entry of the "CAG information list" for the current PLMN, if any. If the "CAG information list" stored in the UE does not include the current PLMN's entry, the UE shall add an entry for the current PLMN to the "CAG information list" and store an "indication that the UE is only allowed to access 5GS via CAG cells" in the entry of the "CAG information list" for the current PLMN. If the UE does not have a stored "CAG information list", the UE shall create a new "CAG information list" and add an entry with an "indication that the UE is only allowed to access 5GS via CAG cells" for the current PLMN.

In addition:

i) if the "allowed CAG list" for the current PLMN includes one or more CAG-IDs, then the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE and shall search for a suitable cell according to 3GPPTS38.304[28] with the updated CAG information; or

ii) if the "allowed CAG list" for the current PLMN does not include any CAG-ID, then the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH and shall apply the PLMN selection process defined in 3GPP TS 23.122 [5] with the updated "CAG information list".

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall in addition set the EPS update status to EU3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED, reset the attach attempt counter and enter the state EMM-DEREGISTERED.

#77 (Wireline access area not allowed).

 5GMM cause #77 is only applicable when received from a wireline access network by the 5G-RG or the W-AGF acting on behalf of the FN-CRG (or on behalf of the N5GC device). 5GMM cause #77 received from a 5G access network other than a wireline access network and 5GMM cause #77 received by the W-AGF acting on behalf of the FN-BRG are considered as abnormal cases and the behaviour of the UE is specified in subclause5.5.2.3.4.

 When received over wireline access network, the 5G-RG and the W-AGF acting on behalf of the FN-CRG (or on behalf of the N5GC device) shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2), shall delete 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and ngKSI, shall reset the registration attempt counter, shall enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED and shall act as specified in subclause5.3.23.

NOTE5: The 5GMM sublayer states, the 5GMM parameters and the registration status are managed per access type independently, i.e. 3GPP access or non-3GPP access (see subclauses4.7.2 and 5.1.3).

#78 (PLMN not allowed to operate at the present UE location).

 This cause value received from a non-satellite NG-RAN cell is considered as an abnormal case and the behaviour of the UE is specified in subclause5.5.2.3.4.

 The UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2) and shall delete 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and ngKSI. Additionally, the UE shall reset the registration attempt counter. The UE shall store the PLMN identity and, if it is known, the current geographical location in the list of "PLMNs not allowed to operate at the present UE location" and shall start a corresponding timer instance (see subclause4.23.2). The UE shall enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH and perform a PLMN selection according to 3GPPTS23.122[5].

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall handle the EMM parameters EMM state, EPS update status, 4G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list, eKSI and attach attempt counter as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] for the case when a DETACH REQUEST is received with the EMM cause with the same value and with detach type set to "re-attach not required".

#79 (UAS services not allowed).

- A UE which is not a UE supporting UAS services receiving this cause value shall considered it as an abnormal case and the behaviour of the UE is specified in subclause5.5.2.3.4.

 A UE supporting UAS service shall set the 5GS update status to 5U2 NOT UPDATED and enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE or 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH. Additionally, the UE shall reset the registration attempt counter. If the UE re-attempt the registration procedure to the current PLMN, the UE shall not include the service-level device ID set to the CAA-level UAV ID in the Service-level-AA container IE of REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall in addition set the EPS update status to EU2 NOT UPDATED, reset the attach attempt counter and enter the state EMM-DEREGISTERED.

#93 (Onboarding services terminated).

 If the UE is not registered for onboarding services in SNPN, this cause value received from a cell belonging to an SNPN is considered as an abnormal case and the behaviour of the UE is specified in subclause5.5.2.3.4.

 If the UE is not operating in SNPN access operation mode, the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH and perform a PLMN selection according to 3GPPTS23.122[5].

 If the UE is operating in SNPN access operation mode, the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH and perform an SNPN selection according to 3GPPTS23.122[5].

NOTE6: In case the configuration of one or more entries of the "list of subscriber data" was not completed at the time of network-initiated de-registration procedure, the UE can retry registration after the de-registration procedure is completed.

5.5.2.3.3 Network-initiated de-registration procedure completion by the network

The network shall stop timer T3522 upon receipt of the DEREGISTRATION ACCEPT message. The network shall enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED for 3GPP access if the de-registration request is for 3GPP access. The network shall enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED for non-3GPP access if the de-registration request is for non-3GPP access. The network shall enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED for both 3GPP access and non-3GPP access if the de-registration request is for both 3GPP access and non-3GPP access.

5.5.2.3.4 Abnormal cases in the UE

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a) Transmission failure of DEREGISTRATION ACCEPT message indication from lower layers.

 The de-registration procedure shall be progressed and the UE shall send the DEREGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

b) DEREGISTRATION REQUEST, other 5GMM cause values than those treated in subclause5.5.2.3.2, cases of 5GMM cause value#11, #15, #22, #72, #74, #75, #76, #77, #78, #79 and #93 that are considered as abnormal cases according to subclause5.5.2.3.2 or no 5GMM cause IE is included, and the De-registration type IE indicates "re-registration not required".

 The UE shall delete 5G-GUTI, TAI list, last visited registered TAI, list of equivalent PLMNs (if any), ngKSI, shall set the 5GS update status to 5U2 NOT UPDATED and shall start timer T3502.

 A UE not supporting S1 mode may enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH in order to perform a PLMN selection or SNPN selection according to 3GPPTS23.122[5]; otherwise the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-REGISTRATION.

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in the single-registration mode, the UE shall:

- enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED and attempt to select E-UTRAN radio access technology and proceed with the appropriate EMM specific procedures. In this case, the UE may disable the N1 mode capability (see subclause4.9); or

- enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH in order to perform a PLMN selection according to 3GPPTS23.122[5].

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in the single-registration mode, the UE shall set the EPS update status to EU2 NOT UPDATED, enter the state EMM-DEREGISTERED and shall delete the EMM parameters 4G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and eKSI.

5.5.2.3.5 Abnormal cases in the network side

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a) T3522 time-out

 On the first expiry of the timer, the network shall retransmit the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message and shall start timer T3522. This retransmission is repeated four times, i.e. on the fifth expiry of timer T3522, the de-registration procedure shall be aborted. The network shall change to the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED for the access type which the de-registration procedure is intended for.

b) Lower layer failure

 The de-registration procedure is aborted. The network shall change to the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED for the access type which the de-registration procedure is intended for.

c) De-registration procedure collision

 If the network receives a DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message with "switch off" indication, before the network-initiated de-registration procedure has been completed, both procedures shall be considered completed.

 If the network receives a DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message without "switch off" indication, before the network-initiated de-registration procedure has been completed, the network shall send a DEREGISTRATION ACCEPT message to the UE.

d) De-registration and registration procedure for initial registration collision

 If the network receives a REGISTRATION REQUEST message indicating either "initial registration" or "emergency registration" in the 5GS registration type IE before the network-initiated de-registration procedure  has been completed, the network shall abort the de-registration procedure and the registration procedure shall be progressed after the PDU sessions associated with the access type the REGISTRATION REQUEST message is sent over have been deleted.

NOTE1: The above collision case is valid if the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message indicates the access type over which the initial registration procedure is attempted otherwise both the procedures are progressed.

e) De-registration and registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update collision

 If the network sent a DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message without 5GMM cause value #11, #12, #13 or #15 and the network receives a REGISTRATION REQUEST message indicating either "mobility registration updating" or "periodic registration updating" in the 5GS registration type IE before the network-initiated de-registration procedure has been completed, the de-registration procedure shall be progressed, i.e. the REGISTRATION REQUEST message shall be ignored.

 If the network sent a DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message with 5GMM cause value #11, #12, #13 or #15 and the network receives a REGISTRATION REQUEST message indicating either "mobility registration updating" or "periodic registration updating" in the 5GS registration type IE before the network-initiated de-registration procedure has been completed, the de-registration procedure shall be aborted and the registration procedure shall be progressed.

NOTE2: The above collision case is valid if the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message indicates the access type over which the mobility and periodic registration procedure is attempted otherwise both the procedures are progressed.

f) De-registration and service request procedure collision

 If the network receives a SERVICE REQUEST message or a CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message before the network-initiated de-registration procedure has been completed (e.g. the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message is pending to be sent to the UE), the network shall progress the de-registration procedure.

NOTE3: The above collision case is valid if the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message indicates the access type over which the service request procedure is attempted otherwise both the procedures are progressed.

g) De-registration requested for a UE not supporting CAG due to CAG restrictions

 Based on operator policy, if the network-initiated de-registration procedure is triggered for a UE not supporting CAG due to CAG restrictions, the network shall send the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message including a 5GMM cause value other than the 5GMM cause #76 (Not authorized for this CAG or authorized for CAG cells only).

NOTE4: 5GMM cause #7 (5GS services not allowed), 5GMM cause #11 (PLMN not allowed), 5GMM cause #27 (N1 mode not allowed), 5GMM cause #73 (Serving network not authorized) can be used depending on the subscription of the UE and whether the UE roams or not.

5.5.3 eCall inactivity procedure

The eCall inactivity procedure is performed only in 3GPP access and applicable only to a UE configured for eCall only mode as specified in 3GPPTS31.102[22]. The procedure shall be started when:

a) the UE is in any 5GMM-REGISTERED substate except substates 5GMM-REGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH or 5GMM-REGISTERED.NO-CELL-AVAILABLE;

b) the UE is in 5GMM-IDLE mode; and

c) one of the following conditions applies:

1) timer T3444 expires or is found to have already expired and timer T3445 is not running;

2) timer T3445 expires or is found to have already expired and timer T3444 is not running; or

3) timers T3444 and T3445 expire or are found to have already expired.

The UE shall then perform the following actions:

a) stop other running timers (e.g. T3511, T3512);

b) if the UE is currently registered to the network for 5GS services, perform a de-registration procedure;

c) delete any 5G-GUTI, TAI list, last visited registered TAI, list of equivalent PLMNs, and ngKSI; and

d) enter 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.eCALL-INACTIVE state.

5.5.4 Authentication and key agreement procedure for 5G ProSe UE-to-network relay

5.5.4.1 General

The purpose of the authentication and key agreement procedure for 5G ProSe UE-to-network relay is to perform the authentication for 5G ProSe remote UE initiated by the 5G ProSe UE-to-network relay and to agree on the KAUSF_P and KNR_ProSe when the security for 5G ProSe communication via 5G ProSe UE-to-network relay is performed over control plane as specified in 3GPPTS33.503[56].

The procedure as shown in figure5.5.4.1.1 is initiated by the UE when the UE receives the ProSe direct link establishment request including the SUCI of the 5G ProSe remote UE from the 5G ProSe remote UE, for establishing secure PC5 unicast link as specified in 3GPPTS24.554[19E].

If the network decides to process the relay key request message, the EAP based authentication and key agreement procedure is initiated and controlled by the network. The exchanges of EAP messages between the 5G ProSe remote UE and the network are relayed by the UE.





Figure5.5.4.1.1: Authentication and key agreement procedure for 5G ProSe UE-to-network relay

5.5.4.2 ProSe relay transaction identity (PRTI)

Upon receiving a ProSe direct link establishment request from a 5G ProSe remote UE for establishing a secure PC5 unicast link as specified in 3GPPTS24.554[19E], the UE shall allocate an available PRTI value for the authentication and key agreement procedure for 5G ProSe UE-to-network relay and associate this PRTI value with the 5G ProSe remote UE.

The UE shall release the PRTI value allocated to the authentication and key agreement procedure for 5G ProSe UE-to-network relay when the authentication and key agreement procedure for 5G ProSe UE-to-network relay completes or is aborted.

5.5.4.3 UE-initiated authentication and key agreement procedure initiation

Upon receiving a ProSe direct link establishment request from the 5G ProSe remote UE including the SUCI of the 5G ProSe remote UE, for establishing a secure PC5 unicast link as specified in 3GPPTS24.554[19E] when the security for 5G ProSe communication via 5G ProSe UE-to-network relay is performed over control plane as specified in 3GPPTS33.503[56], the UE shall:

a) allocate a PRTI value as specified in clause5.5.4.2;

b) create a RELAY KEY REQUEST message;

c) set the PRTI IE of the RELAY KEY REQUEST message to the allocated PRTI value;

d) set the relay key request parameters IE of the RELAY KEY REQUEST message with SUCI, relay service code, and nonce_1 received from the of the 5G ProSe remote UE;

e) send the RELAY KEY REQUEST message; and

f) start the timer T35xx upon sending the RELAY KEY REQUEST message.

5.5.4.4 UE-initiated authentication and key agreement procedure accepted by the network

Upon receiving the RELAY KEY REQUEST message, the AMF processes the message and interacts with the AUSF as specified in 3GPPTS33.503[56]. If EAP-AKA' authentication for the 5G ProSe UE-to-network relay is initiated by the network, the AMF shall:

a) create a RELAY AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message;

b) set the PRTI IE of the RELAY AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message to the PRTI value of the received RELAY AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message;

c) set the EAP message IE of the RELAY AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message to EAP request message received from the AUSF; and

d) send the RELAY AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message to the UE.

Upon receiving the RELAY AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message, the UE stops the timer T35xx and forwards the EAP message to the 5G ProSe remote UE as specified in 3GPPTS24.554[19E].

Upon receiving the EAP response message from the 5G ProSe remote UE as specified in 3GPPTS24.554[19E], the UE shall:

a) create a RELAY AUTHENTICATION RESPONSE message;

b) set the PRTI IE of the RELAY AUTHENTICATION RESPONSE message to the PRTI value of the received RELAY AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message;

c) set the EAP message IE of the RELAY AUTHENTICATION RESPONSE message to EAP request message received from the 5G ProSe remote UE; and

d) start a timer T35xx upon sending the RELAY AUTHENTICATION RESPONSE message to the AMF.

After receiving the RELAY AUTHENTICATION RESPONSE message, the AMF may send a new RELAY AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message carrying EAP request message according to further handling of EAP-AKA' authentication from the AUSF as specified in 3GPPTS33.503[56]. The UE repeats the handling of RELAY AUTHENTICATION REQUEST as described above.

Upon receiving the message from the AUSF that the authentication is successful, the AMF shall:

a) create a RELAY KEY ACCEPT message;

b) set the PRTI IE of the RELAY KEY ACCEPT message to the PRTI value of the last received RELAY AUTHENTICATION RESPONSE message;

c) include the EAP message IE of the RELAY KEY ACCEPT message set to EAP-success message received from the AUSF; and

d) include the relay key response parameters IE of the RELAY KEY ACCEPT message set to Key KNR_ProSe and nonce_2 received from AUSF;

Upon receiving the RELAY KEY ACCEPT message, the UE shall forward the EAP-success message and nonce_2 to the 5G ProSe remote UE as specified in 3GPPTS24.554[19E], and considers the authentication is completed successfully.

5.5.4.5 UE-initiated authentication and key agreement procedure not accepted by the network

If the UE-initiated authentication and key agreement procedure is not accepted by the network, the AMF shall:

a) create a RELAY KEY REJECT message;

b) set the PRTI IE of the RELAY KEY REJECT message to the PRTI value of the received RELAY KEY REQUEST message if the network decides to reject the RELAY KEY REQUEST message; or

 set the PRTI IE of the RELAY KEY REJECT message to the PRTI value of the received RELAY AUTHENTICATION RESPONSE message and include the EAP message IE set with EAP-failure message if the AMF receives an EAP-failure message from the AUSF; and

c) send the RELAY KEY REJECT message to the UE.

Upon receiving the RELAY KEY REJECT message, the UE shall consider the authentication has failed and perform the PC5 signalling protocol procedure as specified in subclause7.2.2.5 of 3GPP24.554[19E].

5.5.4.6 Abnormal cases in the UE

The following abnormal cases in the UE can be identified:

a) Transmission failure of RELAY KEY REQUEST message or RELAY KEY AUTHENTICATION RESPONSE message indication from lower layers.

 The UE shall abort the authentication and key agreement procedure for 5G ProSe UE-to-network relay and perform the PC5 signalling protocol procedure as specified in subclause7.2.2.5 of 3GPP24.554[19E].

b) Expiry of timer T35xx.

 The UE shall, on the first expiry of the timer T35xx, retransmit the RELAY KEY REQUEST message or the RELAY KEY AUTHENTICATION RESPONSE message and shall reset and start timer T35xx. This retransmission is repeated four times, i.e. on the fifth expiry of timer T35xx, the procedure shall be aborted.

c) Collision between the authentication and key agreement procedure for 5G ProSe UE-to-network relay and de-registration procedure.

 The UE shall abort the authentication and key agreement procedure for 5G ProSe UE-to-network relay, proceed with the network initiated de-registration procedure, and perform the PC5 signalling protocol procedure as specified in subclause7.2.2.5 of 3GPP24.554[19E].

5.5.4.7 Abnormal cases on the network side

The following abnormal cases on the network side can be identified:

a) Lower layer failure before the RELAY KEY AUTHENTICATION RESPONSE message is received.

 The network shall abort the authentication and key agreement procedure for 5G ProSe UE-to-network relay.

b) Collision between the authentication and key agreement procedure for 5G ProSe UE-to-network relay and de-registration procedure.

 The network shall abort the authentication and key agreement procedure for 5G ProSe UE-to-network relay and proceed with the UE-initiated de-registration procedure.

c) Collision between the authentication and key agreement procedure for 5G ProSe UE-to-network relay and other 5GMM procedures other than in itemb.

 The network shall progress both procedures.

5.6 5GMM connection management procedures

5.6.1 Service request procedure

5.6.1.1 General

The purpose of the service request procedure is to change the 5GMM mode from 5GMM-IDLE to 5GMM-CONNECTED mode. If the UE is not using 5GS services with control plane CIoT 5GS optimization, this procedure is used to request the establishment of user-plane resources for PDU sessions which are established without user-plane resources. In latter case, the 5GMM mode can be the 5GMM-IDLE mode or the 5GMM-CONNECTED mode if the UE requires to establish user-plane resources for PDU sessions. If the UE is using 5GS services with control plane CIoT 5GS optimization, this procedure can be used for UE initiated transfer of user data via the control plane from 5GMM-IDLE mode.

NOTE1: The lower layer indicates when the user-plane resources for PDU sessions are successfully established or released.

This procedure is used when:

- the network has downlink signalling pending over 3GPP access and the UE is in 5GMM-IDLE mode over 3GPP access;

- the network has downlink signalling pending over non-3GPP access, the UE is in 5GMM-IDLE mode over non-3GPP access and in 5GMM-IDLE or 5GMM-CONNECTED mode over 3GPP access;

- the UE has uplink signalling pending over 3GPP access and the UE is in 5GMM-IDLE mode over 3GPP access;

- the network has downlink user data pending over 3GPP access and the UE is in 5GMM-IDLE mode over 3GPP access;

- the network has downlink user data pending over non-3GPP access, the UE is in 5GMM-IDLE mode over non-3GPP access and in 5GMM-IDLE or 5GMM-CONNECTED mode over 3GPP access;

- the UE has user data pending over 3GPP access and the UE is in 5GMM-IDLE or 5GMM-CONNECTED mode over 3GPP access;

- the UE has user data pending over non-3GPP access and the UE is in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode over non-3GPP access;

- the UE in 5GMM-IDLE mode over non-3GPP access, receives an indication from the lower layers of non-3GPP access, that the access stratum connection is established between the UE and the network, if T3346 is not running;

- the UE in 5GMM-IDLE or 5GMM-CONNECTED mode over 3GPP access receives a request from the upper layers to perform emergency services fallback and performs emergency services fallback as specified in subclause4.13.4.2 of 3GPPTS23.502[9];

- the UE has to request resources for V2X communication over PC5;

- the UE has to request resources for 5G ProSe direct discovery over PC5 or 5G ProSe direct communication over PC5;

- the MUSIM UE in 5GMM-IDLE mode requests the network to remove the paging restriction; or

- the MUSIM UE requests the release of the NAS signalling connection or rejects the paging request from the network.

This procedure shall not be used for:

a) initiating user data transfer; or

b) PDU session management related signalling other than for performing UE-requested PDU session release procedure related to a PDU session for LADN or for performing the UE-requested PDU session modification procedure to indicate a change of 3GPP PS data off UE status;

when the UE is located outside the LADN service area.

In NB-N1 mode, this procedure shall not be used to request the establishment of user-plane resources: 

a) for a number of PDU sessions that exceeds the UE' s maximum number of supported user-plane resources if there is currently:

1) no user-plane resources established for the UE;

2) user-plane resources established for:

i) one PDU session and the Multiple user-plane resources support bit was set to "Multiple user-plane resources not supported" in the 5GMM capability IE; or

ii) two PDU sessions and the Multiple user-plane resources support bit was set to "Multiple user-plane resources supported" in the 5GMM capability IE; or

b) for additional PDU sessions, if the number of PDU sessions for which user-plane resources are currently established is equal to the UE's maximum number of supported user-plane resources.

The service request procedure is initiated by the UE, however, it can be triggered by the network by means of:

- the paging procedure (see subclause5.6.2) for the transfer of downlink signalling or user data pending over 3GPP access to a UE in 5GMM-IDLE mode over 3GPP access;

- the paging procedure (see subclause5.6.2) for the transfer of downlink signalling or user data pending over non-3GPP access to a UE in 5GMM-IDLE mode over 3GPP access and in 5GMM-IDLE mode over non-3GPP access;

- the notification procedure (see subclause5.6.3) for the transfer of downlink signalling or user data pending over non-3GPP access to a UE in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode over 3GPP access and in 5GMM-IDLE mode over non-3GPP access; or

- the notification procedure (see subclause5.6.3) for the transfer of downlink signalling or user data pending over 3GPP access to a UE in 5GMM-IDLE mode over 3GPP access and in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode over non-3GPP access.

NOTE2: In case the UE is in 5GMM-IDLE mode over 3GPP access and in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode over non-3GPP access and downlink signalling or user data pending over 3GPP access needs to be transferred, the AMF can trigger either the notification procedure or the paging procedure based on implementation.

The UE shall invoke the service request procedure when:

a) the UE, in 5GMM-IDLE mode over 3GPP access, receives a paging request from the network;

NOTE3: As an implementation option, the MUSIM UE is allowed to not invoke service request to respond to paging based on the information available in the paging message, e.g. voice service indication.

b) the UE, in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode over 3GPP access, receives a notification from the network with access type indicating non-3GPP access;

c) the UE, in 5GMM-IDLE mode over 3GPP access, has uplink signalling pending (except in casei);

d) the UE, in 5GMM-IDLE mode over 3GPP access, has uplink user data pending (except in casej);

e) the UE, in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode or in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode with RRC inactive indication, has user data pending due to no user-plane resources established for PDU session(s) used for user data transport;

f) the UE in 5GMM-IDLE mode over non-3GPP access, with T3346 not active or upon expiry of T3346, receives or has already received an indication from the lower layers of non-3GPP access, that the access stratum connection is established between the UE and the network;

g) the UE, in 5GMM-IDLE mode over 3GPP access, receives a notification from the network with access type indicating 3GPP access when the UE is in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode over non-3GPP access;

h) the UE, in 5GMM-IDLE, 5GMM-CONNECTED mode over 3GPP access, or 5GMM-CONNECTED mode with RRC inactive indication, receives a request from the upper layers to perform emergency services fallback and performs emergency services fallback as specified in subclause4.13.4.2 of 3GPPTS23.502[9];

i) the UE, in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode over 3GPP access or in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode with RRC inactive indication, receives a fallback indication from the lower layers (see subclauses5.3.1.2 and 5.3.1.4) and the UE has a pending NAS procedure other than a registration, service request, or de-registration procedure;

j) the UE, in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode over 3GPP access or in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode with RRC inactive indication, receives a fallback indication from the lower layers (see subclauses5.3.1.2 and5.3.1.4) and the UE has pending uplink user data for PDU session(s) with user-plane resources already established but no pending NAS procedure;

k) the UE, in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode and has a NAS signalling connection only, is using 5GS services with control plane CIoT 5GS optimization and has pending user data to be sent via user-plane resources;

l) the UE in 5GMM-IDLE mode over 3GPP access has to request resources for V2X communication over PC5 (see 3GPPTS23.287[6C]);

m) the network supports the paging restriction, and the MUSIM UE in 5GMM-IDLE mode is requesting the network to remove the paging restriction;

n) the UE in 5GMM-IDLE mode over 3GPP access

- has to request resources for 5G ProSe direct discovery over PC5 or 5G ProSe direct communication over PC5 (see 3GPPTS23.304[6E]); or

- acts as a 5G ProSe layer-2 UE-to-network relay UE and receives a trigger from lower layers to establish the NAS signalling connection (see 3GPPTS23.304[6E]);

o) the network supports the N1 NAS signalling connection release, the MUSIM UE,

- is in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode, requests the network to release the NAS signalling connection and, if the network supports the paging restriction, optionally includes paging restriction;

- is in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode with RRC inactive indication, requests the network to release the NAS signalling connection and, if the network supports the paging restriction, optionally includes paging restriction; or

- is in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode with RRC inactive indication, rejects the RAN paging, requests the network to release the NAS signalling connection and, if the network supports the paging restriction, optionally includes paging restrictions; or

p) the network supports the reject paging request, the MUSIM UE in 5GMM-IDLE mode when responding to paging rejects the paging request from the network, requests the network to release the NAS signalling connection and, if the network supports the paging restriction, optionally includes paging restriction.

If one of the above criteria to invoke the service request procedure is fulfilled, then the service request procedure shall only be initiated by the UE when the following conditions are fulfilled:

- its 5GS update status is 5U1 UPDATED, and the TAI of the current serving cell is included in the TAI list; and

- no 5GMM specific procedure is ongoing.

The UE shall not invoke the service request procedure when the UE is in the state 5GMM-SERVICE-REQUEST-INITIATED.

The MUSIM UE shall not initiate service request procedure for requesting the network to release the N1 NAS signalling connection if the UE is registered for emergency services or if the UE has an emergency PDU session established. To enable the emergency call back, the UE shall not initiate service request procedure for requesting the network to release the NAS signalling connection for a UE implementation-specific duration of time after the completion of the emergency services.



Figure5.6.1.1.1: Service Request procedure (Part 1)



Figure5.6.1.1.2: Service Request procedure (Part 2)

A service request attempt counter is used to limit the number of service request attempts and no response from the network. The service request attempt counter shall be incremented as specified in subclause5.6.1.7.

The service request attempt counter shall be reset when:

- a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update is successfully completed;

- a service request procedure is successfully completed;

- a service request procedure is rejected as specified in subclause5.6.1.5 or subclause5.3.20; or

- the UE moves to 5GMM-DEREGISTERED state.

5.6.1.2 Service request procedure initiation

5.6.1.2.1 UE is not using 5GS services with control plane CIoT 5GS optimization

The UE initiates the service request procedure by sending a SERVICE REQUEST message to the AMF. The UE shall start timer T3517 and enter the state 5GMM-SERVICE-REQUEST-INITIATED.

If the UE is sending the SERVICE REQUEST message from 5GMM-IDLE mode and the UE needs to send non-cleartext IEs, the UE shall send the SERVICE REQUEST message including the NAS message container IE as described in subclause4.4.6.

For cases a), b), and g) in subclause5.6.1.1, the service type IE in the SERVICE REQUEST message shall be set to "mobile terminated services".

For cases c), d), e), f), i), j), l) m) and n) in subclause5.6.1.1, if the UE is a UE configured for high priority access in selected PLMN, the service type IE in the SERVICE REQUEST message shall be set to "high priority access".

For case a) in subclause5.6.1.1:

a) if the paging request includes an indication for non-3GPP access type, the Allowed PDU session status IE shall be included in the SERVICE REQUEST message. If the UE has established the PDU session(s) over the non-3GPP access for which the associated S-NSSAI(s) are included in the allowed NSSAI for 3GPP access, the UE shall indicate the PDU session(s) for which the UE allows the user-plane resources to be re-established over 3GPP access in the Allowed PDU session status IE. Otherwise, the UE shall not indicate any PDU session(s) in the Allowed PDU session status IE; and

b) if the UE has uplink user data pending to be sent over 3GPP access, the Uplink data status IE shall be included in the SERVICE REQUEST message to indicate the PDU session(s) for which the UE has pending user data to be sent. Otherwise, the Uplink data status IE shall not be included in the SERVICE REQUEST message.

For case b) in subclause5.6.1.1:

a) the Allowed PDU session status IE shall be included in the SERVICE REQUEST message. If the UE has the PDU session(s) over the non-3GPP access for which the associated S-NSSAI(s)  are included in the allowed NSSAI for 3GPP access, the UE shall indicate the PDU session(s) for which the UE allows the user-plane resources to be re-established over 3GPP access in the Allowed PDU session status IE. Otherwise, the UE shall not indicate any PDU session(s) in the Allowed PDU session status IE; and

b) if the UE has uplink user data pending to be sent over 3GPP access, the Uplink data status IE shall be included in the SERVICE REQUEST message to indicate the PDU session(s) for which the UE has pending user data to be sent. Otherwise, the Uplink data status IE shall not be included in the SERVICE REQUEST message.

When the Allowed PDU session status IE is included in the SERVICE REQUEST message, the UE shall indicate that a PDU session is not allowed to be transferred to the 3GPP access if the 3GPP PS data off UE status is "activated" for the corresponding PDU session and the UE is not using the PDU session to send uplink IP packets for any of the 3GPP PS data off exempt services (see subclause6.2.10).

For case c) in subclause5.6.1.1, the Uplink data status IE shall not be included in the SERVICE REQUEST message except if the UE has one or more active always-on PDU sessions associated with the access type over which the SERVICE REQUEST message is sent. If the UE is not a UE configured for high priority access in selected PLMN and:

a) if the SERVICE REQUEST message is triggered by a request for emergency services from the upper layer, the UE shall set the service type IE in the SERVICE REQUEST message to "emergency services"; or

b) otherwise, the UE shall set the service type IE to "signalling".

When the UE is in a non-allowed area or is not in an allowed area as specified in subclause5.3.5 and:

a) if the uplink signalling pending is to indicate a change of 3GPP PS data off UE status for a PDU session, the UE shall set the service type IE in the SERVICE REQUEST message to "elevated signalling", and shall not include the Uplink data status IE in the SERVICE REQUEST message even if the UE has one or more active always-on PDU sessions associated with the access type over which the SERVICE REQUEST message is sent; or

b) otherwise, the UE shall not initiate service request procedure except for emergency services, high priority access or responding to paging or notification.

For cases d) and e) in subclause5.6.1.1, the Uplink data status IE shall be included in the SERVICE REQUEST message to indicate the PDU session(s) the UE has pending user data to be sent. If the UE is not a UE configured for high priority access in selected PLMN:

a) if there exists an emergency PDU session which is indicated in the Uplink data status IE the service type IE in the SERVICE REQUEST message shall be set to "emergency services"; or

b) otherwise, the service type IE in the SERVICE REQUEST message shall be set to "data".

NOTE1: For a UE in NB-N1 mode, the Uplink data status IE cannot be used to request the establishment of user-plane resources such that there will be user-plane resources established for a number of PDU sessions that exceeds the UE's maximum number of supported user-plane resources.

For case f) in subclause5.6.1.1:

a) if the UE has uplink user data pending to be sent, the Uplink data status IE shall be included in the SERVICE REQUEST message to indicate the PDU session(s) the UE has pending user data to be sent. If the UE is not a UE configured for high priority access in selected PLMN, the service type IE in the SERVICE REQUEST message shall be set to "data";

b) otherwise, if the UE is not a UE configured for high priority access in selected PLMN, the service type IE in the SERVICE REQUEST message shall be set to "signalling".

For case g) in subclause5.6.1.1, if the UE has uplink user data pending to be sent, the Uplink data status IE shall be included in the SERVICE REQUEST message to indicate the PDU session(s) the UE has pending user data to be sent.

For case h) in subclause5.6.1.1, the UE shall send a SERVICE REQUEST message with service type set to "emergency services fallback" and without an Uplink data status IE.

For case i) in subclause5.6.1.1, if the UE is not configured for high priority access in selected PLMN, the UE shall set the Service type IE in the SERVICE REQUEST message as follows:

a) if the pending message is an UL NAS TRANSPORT message with the Request type IE set to "initial emergency request" or "existing emergency PDU session", the UE shall set the Service type IE in the SERVICE REQUEST message to "emergency services"; or

b) otherwise, the UE shall set the Service type IE in the SERVICE REQUEST message to "signalling".

For casej) in subclause5.6.1.1:

a) the UE shall include the Uplink data status IE in the SERVICE REQUEST message indicating the PDU session(s) for which user-plane resources were active prior to receiving the fallback indication, if any; and

b) if the UE is not a UE configured for high priority access in selected PLMN, the UE shall set the Service type IE in the SERVICE REQUEST message as follows:

1) if there is an emergency PDU session which is indicated in the Uplink data status IE, the UE shall set the Service type IE in the SERVICE REQUEST message to "emergency services"; or

2) if there is no emergency PDU session which is indicated in the Uplink data status IE, the UE shall set the Service type IE in the SERVICE REQUEST message to "data".

For case l) and n) in subclause5.6.1.1, if the UE is not a UE configured for high priority access in selected PLMN:

a) if there exists an emergency PDU session which is indicated in the Uplink data status IE the service type IE in the SERVICE REQUEST message shall be set to "emergency services"; or

b) otherwise, the service type IE in the SERVICE REQUEST message shall be set to "signalling".

For case m) in subclause5.6.1.1, the UE shall not include the Paging restriction IE in the SERVICE REQUEST message and set Service type to "signalling". The UE may include the UE request type IE and set Request type to "NAS signalling connection release" to remove the paging restriction and request the release of the NAS signalling connection at the same time. If the UE requests the release of the NAS signalling connection, the UE shall not include the Uplink data status IE in the SERVICE REQUEST message.

For cases o and p in subclause5.6.1.1, the UE shall not include the Uplink data status IE and the Allowed PDU session status IE in the SERVICE REQUEST message. Further,

- for case o in subclause5.6.1.1, the UE shall set Request type to "NAS signalling connection release" in the UE request type IE and Service type to "signalling";

- for case p in subclause5.6.1.1, the UE shall set Request type to "Rejection of paging" in the UE request type IE and Service type to "mobile terminated services"; and

may include its paging restriction preference in the Paging restriction IE in the SERVICE REQUEST message.

The UE shall include a valid 5G-S-TMSI in the 5G-S-TMSI IE of the SERVICE REQUEST message.

For all cases except cases o) and p) in subclause5.6.1.1, if the UE has one or more active always-on PDU sessions associated with the access type over which the SERVICE REQUEST message is sent and the user-plane resources for these PDU sessions are not established, the UE shall include the Uplink data status IE in the SERVICE REQUEST message and indicate that the UE has pending user data to be sent for those PDU sessions.

If the UE has one or more active PDU sessions which are not accepted by the network as always-on PDU sessions and no uplink user data pending to be sent for those PDU sessions, the UE shall not include those PDU sessions in the Uplink data status IE in the SERVICE REQUEST message.

The Uplink data status IE may be included in the SERVICE REQUEST message to indicate which PDU session(s) associated with the access type the SERVICE REQUEST message is sent over have pending user data to be sent.

The PDU session status information element may be included in the SERVICE REQUEST message to indicate:

- the single access PDU session(s) not in 5GSM state PDU SESSION INACTIVE in the UE associated with the access type the SERVICE REQUEST message is sent over; and

- the MA PDU session(s) not in 5GSM state PDU SESSION INACTIVE and having user plane resources established in the UE on the access the SERVICE REQUEST message is sent over.

If the SERVICE REQUEST message includes a NAS message container IE, the AMF shall process the SERVICE REQUEST message that is obtained from the NAS message container IE as described in subclause4.4.6.

If the UE has an emergency PDU session over the non-current access, it shall not initiate the SERVICE REQUEST message with the service type IE set to "emergency services" over the current access, unless the SERVICE REQUEST message has to be initiated to perform handover of an existing emergency PDU session from the non-current access to the current access.

NOTE2: Transfer of an existing emergency PDU session between 3GPP access and non-3GPP access is needed e.g. if the UE determines that the current access is no longer available.

5.6.1.2.2 UE is using 5GS services with control plane CIoT 5GS optimization

The UE shall send a CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message, start T3517 and enter the state 5GMM-SERVICE-REQUEST-INITIATED.

For case a), and case b) in subclause5.6.1.1, the Control plane service type of the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message shall indicate "mobile terminating request". If:

a) the UE only has uplink CIoT user data or SMS to be sent, the UE shall:

1) if the data size is not more than 254 octets and there is no other optional IE to be included in the message:

i) for sending CIoT user data, set the Data type field to "control plane user data", include the PDU session ID, data, and Downlink data expected (DDX) (if available), in the CIoT small data container IE; and

ii) for sending SMS, set the Data type field to "SMS", include SMS in the CIoT small data container IE; and

2) otherwise if the data size is more than 254 octets or there are other optional IEs to be included in the message:

i) for sending CIoT user data, set the Payload container type IE to "CIoT user data container", include the PDU session ID in the PDU session ID IE and include data in the Payload container IE as described in subclause5.4.5.2.2; and

ii) for sending SMS, set the Payload container type IE to "SMS" and include data in the Payload container IE as described in subclause5.4.5.2.2; and

b) the paging request or the notification includes an indication for non-3GPP access type, the UE has at least one PDU session that is not associated with control plane only indication, the Allowed PDU session status IE shall be included in the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message.

NOTE1: The term DDX used in the present document corresponds to the term NAS RAI used in 3GPPTS23.502[9].

For case c), and case d) if the UE has pending CIoT user data that is to be sent via the control plane in subclause5.6.1.1, the UE shall set the Control plane service type of the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message to "mobile originating request". If the UE has only uplink CIoT user data, SMS or location services message to be sent, the UE shall:

a) if the data size is not more than 254 octets, there is no other optional IE to be included in the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message, and the data being sent is:

1) CIoT user data, set the Data type field to "control plane user data", include the PDU session ID, data, and Downlink data expected (DDX) (if available), in the CIoT small data container IE;

2) location services message, set the Data type field to "Location services message container" and Downlink data expected (DDX), if available, in the CIoT small data container IE, and:

i) if routing information is provided by upper layers:

A) set the length of additional information field in the CIoT small data container IE to the length of routing information provided by upper layer location services application (see subclause9.11.3.67), and set the additional information field in the CIoT small data container IE to the routing information provided by upper layer location services application (see subclause9.11.3.67); or

B) otherwise set the length of additional information field in the CIoT small data container IE to zero. In this case the Additional information field of the CIoT small data container IE shall not be included; and

ii) set the Data contents field of the CIoT small data container IE to the location services message payload; or

3) SMS, set the Data type field to "SMS", include SMS in the CIoT small data container IE; or

b) otherwise if the data size is more than 254 octets or there are other optional IEs to be included in the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message, and the data being sent is:

1) CIoT user data, set the Payload container type IE to "CIoT user data container", include the PDU session ID in the PDU session ID IE and include data in the Payload container IE as described in subclause5.4.5.2.2;

2) location services message, set the Payload container type IE to "Location services message container", include data in the Payload container IE as described in subclause5.4.5.2.2. If the upper layer location services application provides the routing information set the Additional information IE to the routing information as described in subclause5.4.5.2.2; or

3) SMS, set the Payload container type IE to "SMS" and include data in the Payload container IE as described in subclause5.4.5.2.2.

For case a), and case b) in subclause5.6.1.1, if the UE has pending user data that is to be sent via the user plane, the UE shall set the Control plane service type of the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message to "mobile terminating request". The UE shall include the Uplink data status IE in the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message to indicate which PDU session(s) have pending user data to be sent via user-plane resources.

For case c) in subclause5.6.1.1, if the UE is in WB-N1 mode and the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message is triggered by a request for emergency services from the upper layer, the UE shall set the Control plane service type of the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message to "emergency services".

For cases d) and k), if the UE has pending user data that is to be sent via the user plane in subclause5.6.1.1:

a) and if there exists an emergency PDU session which is indicated in the Uplink data status IE, the UE shall set the Control plane service type of the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message to "emergency services"; or

b) otherwise, the UE shall set the Control plane service type to "mobile originating request".

The UE shall include the Uplink data status IE in the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message to indicate which PDU session(s) have pending user data to be sent via user-plane resources.

NOTE2: For a UE in NB-N1 mode, the Uplink data status IE cannot be used to request the establishment of user-plane resources such that there will be user-plane resources established for a number of PDU sessions that exceeds the UE's maximum number of supported user-plane resources.

For case h) in subclause5.6.1.1, if the UE is in WB-N1 mode and the UE does not have any PDU session that is associated with control plane only indication, the UE shall send a CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message with the Control plane service type set to "emergency services fallback" and without an Uplink data status IE.

For case i) in subclause5.6.1.1, the Control plane service type of the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message shall indicate "mobile originating request". If the pending message is an UL NAS TRANSPORT message with the Payload container type IE set to:

a) "SMS", "Location services message container", or "CIoT user data container", the UE shall send the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST and include the SMS, location services message, or CIoT user data as described in this subclause; or

b) otherwise, the UE shall send the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST:

1) without including the CIoT small data container IE and without including the NAS message container IE if the UE has no other optional IE to be sent; or

2) with the NAS message container IE if the UE has an optional IE to be sent as described in this subclause.

For casej) in subclause5.6.1.1, the Control plane service type of the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message shall indicate "mobile originating request". The UE shall include the Uplink data status IE in the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message indicating the PDU session(s) for which user-plane resources were active prior to receiving the fallback indication, if any.

For cases o) and p) in subclause5.6.1.1, the UE shall not include the Uplink data status IE and the Allowed PDU session status IE in the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message. Further,

- for case o) in subclause5.6.1.1, the UE shall set Request type to "NAS signalling connection release" in the UE request type IE and Control plane service type to "mobile originating request";

- for case p) in subclause5.6.1.1, the UE shall set Request type to "Rejection of paging" in the UE request type IE and Control plane service type to "mobile terminated services"; and

may include its paging restriction preferences in the Paging restriction IE in the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message.

For case m) in clause5.6.1.1, the Control plane service type of the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message shall indicate "mobile originating request". The UE shall not include the Paging restriction IE in the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message. The UE may include the UE request type IE and set Request type to "NAS signalling connection release" to remove the paging restriction and request the release of the NAS signalling connection at the same time. If the UE requests the release of the NAS signalling connection, the UE shall not include the Uplink data status IE in the SERVICE REQUEST message.

The UE may include the PDU session status IE in the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message to indicate which PDU session(s) associated with the access type the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message is sent over are active in the UE.

5.6.1.3 Common procedure initiation

Upon receipt of the SERVICE REQUEST or CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message, the AMF may initiate the common procedures e.g. the 5G AKA based primary authentication and key agreement procedure or the EAP based primary authentication and key agreement procedure.

5.6.1.4 Service request procedure accepted by the network

5.6.1.4.1 UE is not using 5GS services with control plane CIoT 5GS optimization

For cases other than h) in subclause5.6.1.1, the UE shall treat the reception of the SERVICE ACCEPT message as successful completion of the procedure. The UE shall reset the service request attempt counter, stop timer T3517 and enter the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.

For case h) in subclause5.6.1.1,

a) the UE shall treat the indication from the lower layers when the UE has changed to S1 mode or E-UTRA connected to 5GCN (see 3GPPTS23.502[9]) as successful completion of the procedure and stop timer T3517;

b) if a UE operating in single-registration mode has changed to S1 mode, it shall disable the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access (see subclause4.9.2); and

c) the AMF shall not check for CAG restrictions.

If the PDU session status information element is included in the SERVICE REQUEST message, then:

a) for single access PDU sessions, the AMF shall:

1) perform a local release of all those PDU sessions which are not in 5GSM state PDU SESSION INACTIVE on the AMF side associated with the access type the SERVICE REQUEST message is sent over, but are indicated by the UE as being in 5GSM state PDU SESSION INACTIVE; and

2) request the SMF to perform a local release of all those PDU sessions; and

b) for MA PDU sessions, the AMF shall:

1) for MA PDU sessions having user plane resources established in the AMF only on the access the SERVICE REQUEST message is sent over, but are indicated by the UE as no user plane resources established:

i) for all those MA PDU sessions without a PDN connection established as a user-plane resource, perform a local release of all those MA PDU sessions and request the SMF to perform a local release of all those MA PDU sessions; and

ii)  for all those MA PDU sessions with a PDN connection established as a user-plane resource, perform a local release of user plane resources of all those PDU sessions on the access the SERVICE REQUEST message is sent over and request the SMF to perform a local release of user plane resources of all those PDU sessions on the access type the SERVICE REQUEST message is sent over; and

2) for MA PDU sessions having user plane resources established on both accesses in the AMF, but are indicated by the UE as no user plane resources established:

i) perform a local release of user plane resources of all those PDU sessions on the access the SERVICE REQUEST message is sent over; and

ii) request the SMF to perform a local release of user plane resources of all those PDU sessions on the access type the SERVICE REQUEST message is sent over.

If the AMF needs to initiate PDU session status synchronization or a PDU session status IE was included in the SERVICE REQUEST message, the AMF shall include a PDU session status IE in the SERVICE ACCEPT message to indicate:

- which single access PDU sessions associated with the access type the SERVICE ACCEPT message is sent over are not in 5GSM state PDU SESSION INACTIVE in the AMF; and

- which MA PDU sessions are not in 5GSM state PDU SESSION INACTIVE and having user plane resources established in the AMF on the access the SERVICE ACCEPT message is sent over.

If the PDU session status information element is included in the SERVICE ACCEPT message, then:

a) for single access PDU sessions, the UE shall perform a local release of all those PDU sessions which are not in 5GSM state PDU SESSION INACTIVE or PDU SESSION ACTIVE PENDING on the UE side associated with the access type the SERVICE ACCEPT message is sent over, but are indicated by the AMF as in 5GSM state PDU SESSION INACTIVE; and

b) for MA PDU sessions, for all those PDU sessions which are not in 5GSM state PDU SESSION INACTIVE or PDU SESSION ACTIVE PENDING and have user plane resources established on the UE side associated with the access the SERVICE ACCEPT message is sent over, but are indicated by the AMF as no user plane resources established:

1) for MA PDU sessions having user plane resources established only on the access type the SERVICE ACCEPT message is sent over, the UE shall perform a local release of those MA PDU sessions; and

2) for MA PDU sessions having user plane resources established on both accesses, the UE shall perform a local release on the user plane resources on the access type the SERVICE ACCEPT message is sent over.

If the Uplink data status IE is included in the SERVICE REQUEST message and the UE is:

a) not in NB-N1 mode; or

b) in NB-N1 mode and the UE does not indicate a request to have user-plane resources established for a number of PDU sessions that exceeds the UE's maximum number of supported user-plane resources;

the AMF shall:

a) indicate the SMF to re-establish the user-plane resources for the corresponding PDU sessions;

b) include the PDU session reactivation result IE in the SERVICE ACCEPT message to indicate the user-plane resources re-establishment result of the PDU sessions for which the UE requested to re-establish the user-plane resources; and

c) determine the UE presence in LADN service area and forward the UE presence in LADN service area towards the SMF, if the corresponding PDU session is a PDU session for LADN.

If the Allowed PDU session status IE is included in the SERVICE REQUEST message, the AMF shall:

a) for a 5GSM message from each SMF that has indicated pending downlink signalling only, forward the received 5GSM message via 3GPP access to the UE after the SERVICE ACCEPT message is sent;

b) for each SMF that has indicated pending downlink data only:

1) notify the SMF that reactivation of the user-plane resources for the corresponding PDU session(s) associated with non-3GPP access cannot be performed if the corresponding PDU session ID(s) are not indicated in the Allowed PDU session status IE; and

2) notify the SMF that reactivation of the user-plane resources for the corresponding PDU session(s) associated with non-3GPP access can be performed if:

i) for a UE not in NB-N1 mode, the corresponding PDU session ID(s) are indicated in the Allowed PDU session status IE; or

ii) for a UE in NB-N1 mode, the corresponding PDU session ID(s) are indicated in the Allowed PDU session status IE, and the resulting number of PDU sessions with established user-plane resources does not exceed the UE's maximum number of supported user-plane resources;

c) for each SMF that have indicated pending downlink signalling and data:

1) notify the SMF that reactivation of the user-plane resources for the corresponding PDU session(s) associated with non-3GPP access cannot be performed if the corresponding PDU session ID(s) are not indicated in the Allowed PDU session status IE;

2) notify the SMF that reactivation of the user-plane resources for the corresponding PDU session(s) associated with non-3GPP access can be performed if:

i) for a UE not in NB-N1 mode, the corresponding PDU session ID(s) are indicated in the Allowed PDU session status IE; or

ii) for a UE in NB-N1 mode, the corresponding PDU session ID(s) are indicated in the Allowed PDU session status IE, and the resulting number of PDU sessions with established user-plane resources does not exceed the UE's maximum number of supported user-plane resources; and

3) discard the received 5GSM message for PDU session(s) associated with non-3GPP access; and

d) include the PDU session reactivation result IE in the SERVICE ACCEPT message to indicate the successfully re-established user-plane resources for the corresponding PDU sessions, if any.

If due to regional subscription restrictions or access restrictions the UE is not allowed to access the TA or due to CAG restrictions the UE is not allowed to access the cell, but the UE has an emergency PDU session established, the AMF may accept the SERVICE REQUEST message and indicate to the SMF to perform a local release of all non-emergency PDU sessions (associated with 3GPP access if it is due to CAG restrictions) and informs the UE via the PDU session status IE in the SERVICE ACCEPT message. The AMF shall not indicate to the SMF to release the emergency PDU session. If the AMF indicated to the SMF to perform a local release of all non-emergency PDU sessions (associated with 3GPP access if it is due to CAG restrictions), the network shall behave as if the UE is registered for emergency services.

If the PDU session reactivation result IE is included in the SERVICE ACCEPT message indicating that the user-plane resources have been successfully reactivated for a PDU session that was requested by the UE in the Allowed PDU session status IE, the UE considers the corresponding PDU session to be associated with the 3GPP access. If the user-plane resources of a PDU session have been successfully reactivated over the 3GPP access, the AMF and SMF update the associated access type of the corresponding PDU session.

If the user-plane resources cannot be established for a PDU session, the AMF shall include the PDU session reactivation result IE in the SERVICE ACCEPT message indicating that user-plane resources for the corresponding PDU session cannot be re-established, and:

a) if the user-plane resources cannot be established because the SMF indicated to the AMF that the UE is located out of the LADN service area (see 3GPPTS29.502[20A]), the AMF shall include the PDU session reactivation result error cause IE with the 5GMM cause set to #43 "LADN not available";

b) if the user-plane resources cannot be established because the SMF indicated to the AMF that only prioritized services are allowed (see 3GPPTS29.502[20A]), the AMF shall include the PDU session reactivation result error cause IE with the 5GMM cause set to #28 "restricted service area";

c) if the user-plane resources cannot be established because the SMF indicated to the AMF that the resource is not available in the UPF (see 3GPPTS29.502[20A]), the AMF shall include the PDU session reactivation result error cause IE with the 5GMM cause set to #92 "insufficient user-plane resources for the PDU session";

e) if the user-plane resources cannot be established because the SMF indicated to the AMF that the S-NSSAI associated with the PDU session is unavailable due to NSAC (see 3GPPTS29.502[20A]), the AMF shall include the PDU session reactivation result error cause IE with the 5GMM cause set to #69 "insufficient resources for specific slice"; or

d) otherwise, the AMF may include the PDU session reactivation result error cause IE to indicate the cause of failure to re-establish the user-plane resources.

NOTE1: It is up to UE implementation when to re-send a request for user-plane re-establishment for the associated PDU session after receiving a PDU session reactivation result error cause IE with a 5GMM cause set to #92 "insufficient user-plane resources for the PDU session".

NOTE2: The UE can locally start a back-off timer after receiving a PDU session reactivation result error cause IE with a 5GMM cause set to #69 "insufficient resources for specific slice". The value of the back-off timer is up to UE implementation. Upon expiry of the back-off timer, the UE can re-send a request for user-plane re-establishment for the associated PDU session.

If the PDU session reactivation result IE is included in the SERVICE ACCEPT message indicating that the user-plane resources cannot be established for a PDU session that was requested by the UE in the Allowed PDU session status IE, the UE considers the corresponding PDU session to be associated with the non-3GPP access.

If the MUSIM UE does not include the Paging restriction IE in the SERVICE REQUEST message, the AMF shall delete any stored paging restriction for the UE and stop restricting paging.

For case m in subclause5.6.1.1 when the MUSIM UE sets the Request type to "NAS signalling connection release" in the SERVICE REQUEST message, the AMF shall initiate the release of the N1 NAS signalling connection after the completion of the service request procedure.

For cases o and p in subclause5.6.1.1 when the MUSIM UE sets the Request type to "NAS signalling connection release" or to "Rejection of paging" in the UE request type IE in the SERVICE REQUEST message and if the UE requests restriction of paging by including the Paging restriction IE, the AMF:

- if accepts the paging restriction, shall include the 5GS additional request result IE in the SERVICE ACCEPT message and set the Paging restriction decision to "paging restriction is accepted". The AMF shall store the paging restriction of the UE and enforce these restrictions in the paging procedure as described in clause5.6.2; or

- if rejects the paging restriction, shall include the 5GS additional request result IE in the SERVICE ACCEPT message and set the Paging restriction decision to "paging restriction is rejected", and shall discard the received paging restriction. The AMF shall delete any stored paging restriction for the UE and stop restricting paging; and

the AMF shall initiate the release of the N1 NAS signalling connection as follows:

- for case o in subclause5.6.1.1, after the completion of the service request procedure;

- for case p in subclause5.6.1.1, after the completion of the generic UE configuration update procedure that is triggered after the completion of the service request procedure.

If the SERVICE REQUEST message is for emergency services fallback, the AMF triggers the emergency services fallback procedure as specified in subclause4.13.4.2 of 3GPPTS23.502[9].

If the UE having an emergency PDU session sent the SERVICE REQUEST message via:

a) a CAG cell and none of the CAG-IDs of the CAG cell are included in the "Allowed CAG list" for the current PLMN in the UE's subscription; or

b) a non-CAG cell in a PLMN for which the UE's subscription contains an "indication that the UE is only allowed to access 5GS via CAG cells";

the network shall accept the SERVICE REQUEST message and release all non-emergency PDU sessions locally. The emergency PDU session shall not be released.

If the AMF received the list of TAIs from the satellite NG-RAN as described in 3GPPTS23.501[8], and determines that any but not all TAIs in the received list of TAIs is forbidden for roaming or for regional provision of service as per information from the UDM and operator's choice, the AMF shall include the TAI(s) in:

a) the Forbidden TAI(s) for the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" IE; or

b) the Forbidden TAI(s) for the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service" IE; or

c) both;

in the SERVICE ACCEPT message.

NOTE9: "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" corresponds to cause values #13 and #15, and "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service" corresponds cause value #12.

If the UE receives the Forbidden TAI(s) for the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" IE in the SERVICE ACCEPT message and the TAI(s) included in the IE is not part of the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming", the UE shall store the TAI(s) included in the IE into the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" and remove the TAI(s) from the stored TAI list if present.

If the UE receives the Forbidden TAI(s) for the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service" IE in the SERVICE ACCEPT message and the TAI(s) included in the IE is not part of the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service", the UE shall store the TAI(s) included in the IE into the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service" and remove the TAI(s) from the stored TAI list if present.

5.6.1.4.2 UE is using 5GS services with control plane CIoT 5GS optimization

For case a in subclause5.6.1.1, upon receipt of the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message with Control plane service type indicating "mobile terminating request", after completion of the 5GMM common procedures (if initiated) according to subclause5.6.1.3, the AMF shall send a SERVICE ACCEPT message.

For cases c, d and m in subclause5.6.1.1, upon receipt of the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message with Control plane service type indicating "mobile originating request", after completion of the 5GMM common procedures (if initiated) according to subclause5.6.1.3, the AMF shall send a SERVICE ACCEPT message, except for case d when the DDX field of the Release assistance indication IE or the DDX field of the CIoT small data container IE indicates "No further uplink and no further downlink data transmission subsequent to the uplink data transmission is expected".

For case a, c and d:

a) if the CIoT small data container IE is included in the message, the AMF shall decipher the value part of the CIoT small data container IE and:

1) if the Data type field indicates "control plane user data", extract the PDU session ID and data content from the CIoT small data container IE, look up a PDU session routing context for the UE and the PDU session ID, and forward the content of the CIoT small data container IE to the SMF associated with the UE;

2) if the Data type field indicates "SMS", forward the content of the CIoT small data container IE to the SMSF associated with the UE; or

3) if the Data type field indicates "Location services message container", and if

i) length of additional information field in the CIoT small data container IE is zero, forward the value of Data type field and the content of the CIoT small data container IE to the to the location services application; or

ii) otherwise forward the value of Data type field and the content of the CIoT small data container IE to the LMF associated with the routing information that is included in the additional information field of the CIoT small data container IE; or

NOTE1: If the AMF determines there is no pending data or signalling for the UE, the AMF provides an indication of control plane CIoT 5GS Optimisation to the LMF as specified in 3GPPTS29.518[20B].

b) otherwise, the AMF shall decipher the value part of NAS message container IE and:

1) if the Payload container IE is included in the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message and if the Payload container type IE is set to "CIoT user data container", the AMF shall look up a PDU session routing context for the UE and the PDU session ID, and forward the content of the Payload container IE to the SMF associated with the UE;

2) if the Payload container IE is included in the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message and if the Payload container type IE is set to "SMS", the AMF shall forward the content of the Payload container IE to the SMSF associated with the UE;

3) if the PDU session status IE is included in the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message or the AMF needs to perform a PDU session status synchronization, the AMF shall include a PDU session status IE in the SERVICE ACCEPT message to indicate which PDU sessions associated with the access type the SERVICE ACCEPT message is sent over are active in the AMF;

4) if the Uplink data status IE is included in the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message and the UE is:

i) not in NB-N1 mode; or

ii) in NB-N1 mode and the UE does not indicate a request to have user-plane resources established for a number of PDU sessions that exceeds the UE's maximum number of supported user-plane resources;

 the AMF shall:

i) indicate the SMF to re-establish the user-plane resources for the corresponding PDU sessions; and

ii) include the PDU session reactivation result IE in the SERVICE ACCEPT message to indicate the user-plane resources re-establishment result of the PDU sessions for which the UE requested to re-establish the user-plane resources;

5) if the Uplink data status IE is included in the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST, the UE is in NB-N1 mode, and the UE indicates a request to have user-plane resources established for a number of PDU sessions that exceeds the UE's maximum number of supported user-plane resources, the AMF shall not indicate to the SMF to re-establish the user-plane resources for the corresponding PDU sessions; or

6) otherwise, if the Payload container IE is included in the message and if the Payload container type IE is set to "Location services message container", the AMF shall forward the Payload container type and the content of the Payload container IE to the LMF associated with the routing information included in the Additional information IE of the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message.

NOTE2: If the AMF determines there is no pending data or signalling for the UE, the AMF provides an indication of control plane CIoT 5GS Optimisation to the LMF as specified in 3GPPTS29.518[20B].

For case k) in subclause5.6.1.1, if the Uplink data status IE is included in the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message and the UE is:

a) not in NB-N1 mode; or

b) in NB-N1 mode and the UE does not indicate a request to have user-plane resources established for a number of PDU sessions that exceeds the UE's maximum number of supported user-plane resources,

the AMF shall:

a) indicate the SMF to re-establish the user-plane resources for the corresponding PDU sessions; and

b) include the PDU session reactivation result IE in the SERVICE ACCEPT message to indicate the user-plane resources re-establishment result of the PDU sessions for which the UE requested to re-establish the user-plane resources.

If the Allowed PDU session status IE is included in the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message, the AMF shall:

a) for a 5GSM message from each SMF that has indicated pending downlink signalling only, forward the received 5GSM message via 3GPP access to the UE after the SERVICE ACCEPT message is sent;

b) for each SMF that has indicated pending downlink data only:

1) notify the SMF that reactivation of the user-plane resources for the corresponding PDU session(s) associated with non-3GPP access cannot be performed if the corresponding PDU session ID(s) are not indicated in the Allowed PDU session status IE; and

2) notify the SMF that reactivation of the user-plane resources for the corresponding PDU session(s) associated with non-3GPP access can be performed if:

i) for a UE not in NB-N1 mode, the corresponding PDU session ID(s) are indicated in the Allowed PDU session status IE; or

ii) for a UE in NB-N1 mode, the corresponding PDU session ID(s) are indicated in the Allowed PDU session status IE and the resulting number of PDU sessions with established user-plane resources does not exceed the UE's maximum number of supported user-plane resources;

c) for each SMF that have indicated pending downlink signalling and data:

1) notify the SMF that reactivation of the user-plane resources for the corresponding PDU session(s) associated with non-3GPP access cannot be performed if the corresponding PDU session ID(s) are not indicated in the Allowed PDU session status IE;

2) notify the SMF that reactivation of the user-plane resources for the corresponding PDU session(s) associated with non-3GPP access can be performed if:

i) for a UE not in NB-N1 mode, the corresponding PDU session ID(s) are indicated in the Allowed PDU session status IE; or

ii) for a UE in NB-N1 mode, the corresponding PDU session ID(s) are indicated in the Allowed PDU session status IE and the resulting number of PDU sessions with established user-plane resources does not exceed the UE's maximum number of supported user-plane resources; and

3) discard the received 5GSM message for PDU session(s) associated with non-3GPP access; and

d) include the PDU session reactivation result IE in the SERVICE ACCEPT message to indicate the successfully re-established user-plane resources for the corresponding PDU sessions, if any.

If the DDX field in the CIoT small data container IE or the DDX field of the Release assistance indication IE indicates:

1) "No further uplink and no further downlink data transmission subsequent to the uplink data transmission is expected" and if there is no downlink signalling or downlink data for the UE; or

2) "Only a single downlink data transmission and no further uplink data transmission subsequent to the uplink data transmission is expected" and upon subsequent delivery of the next received downlink data transmission to the UE and if there is no additional downlink signalling or downlink data for the UE,

the AMF initiates the release of the N1 NAS signalling connection (see 3GPPTS23.502[9]).

If the MUSIM UE does not include the Paging restriction IE in the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message, the AMF shall delete any stored paging restriction for the UE and stop restricting paging.

For case m in subclause5.6.1.1 when the MUSIM UE sets the Request type to "NAS signalling connection release" in the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message, the AMF shall initiate the release of the N1 NAS signalling connection after the completion of the service request procedure.

For cases o and p in subclause5.6.1.1 when the MUSIM UE sets the Request type to "NAS signalling connection release" or to "Rejection of paging" in the UE request type IE in the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message and if the UE requests restriction of paging by including the Paging restriction IE, the AMF:

- if accepts the paging restriction, shall include the 5GS additional request result IE in the SERVICE ACCEPT message and set the Paging restriction decision to "paging restriction is accepted". The AMF shall store the paging restriction of the UE and enforce these restrictions in the paging procedure as described in clause5.6.2; or

- if rejects the paging restriction, shall include the 5GS additional request result IE in the SERVICE ACCEPT message and set the Paging restriction decision to "paging restriction is rejected", and shall discard the received paging restriction. The AMF shall delete any stored paging restriction for the UE and stop restricting paging; and

the AMF shall send the SERVICE ACCEPT message and initiate the release of the N1 NAS signalling connection as follows:

- for case o in subclause5.6.1.1, after the completion of the service request procedure;

- for case p in subclause5.6.1.1, after the completion of the generic UE configuration update procedure that is triggered after the completion of the service request procedure.

Upon successful completion of the procedure, the UE shall reset the service request attempt counter, stop the timer T3517 and enter the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.

If the PDU session status information element is included in the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message, then the AMF:

a) shall perform a local release of all those PDU sessions which are not in 5GSM state PDU SESSION INACTIVE on the AMF side associated with the access type the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message is sent over, but are indicated by the UE as being inactive, and

b) request the SMF to perform a local release of all those PDU sessions.

If the PDU session status information element is included in the SERVICE ACCEPT message, then the UE shall perform a local release of all those PDU sessions which are not in 5GSM state PDU SESSION INACTIVE or PDU SESSION ACTIVE PENDING on the UE side associated with the 3GPP access but are indicated by the AMF as being inactive.

If the user-plane resources cannot be established for a PDU session, the AMF shall include the PDU session reactivation result IE in the SERVICE ACCEPT message indicating that user-plane resources for the corresponding PDU session cannot be re-established, and:

a) if the user-plane resources cannot be established because the SMF indicated to the AMF that the UE is located out of the LADN service area (see 3GPPTS29.502[20A]), the AMF shall include the PDU session reactivation result error cause IE with the 5GMM cause set to #43 "LADN not available";

b) if the user-plane resources cannot be established because the SMF indicated to the AMF that only prioritized services are allowed (see 3GPPTS29.502[20A]), the AMF shall include the PDU session reactivation result error cause IE with the 5GMM cause set to #28 "restricted service area"; or

c) if the user-plane resources cannot be established because:

1) the SMF indicated to the AMF that the resource is not available in the UPF (see 3GPPTS29.502[20A]); or

2) the UE is in NB-N1 mode and the result will lead to user-plane resources established for more than two PDU sessions (see 3GPPTS23.502[9])

 the AMF shall include the PDU session reactivation result error cause IE with the 5GMM cause set to #92"insufficient user-plane resources for the PDU session":

NOTE3: For a UE that is not in NB-N1 mode, it is up to UE implementation when to re-send a request for user-plane re-establishment for the associated PDU session after receiving a PDU session reactivation result error cause IE with a 5GMM cause set to #92 "insufficient user-plane resources for the PDU session".

If the PDU session reactivation result IE is included in the SERVICE ACCEPT message indicating that the user-plane resources cannot be established for a PDU session that was requested by the UE in the Allowed PDU session status IE, the UE considers the corresponding PDU session to be associated with the non-3GPP access.

For case d) in subclause5.6.1.1, the UE shall also treat the indication from the lower layers that the RRC connection has been released as successful completion of the procedure. The UE shall reset the service request attempt counter, stop the timer T3517 and enter the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.

Upon receipt of the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message with uplink data:

- if the DDX field of the Release assistance indication IE or the DDX field of the CIoT small data container IE is set to "No further uplink and no further downlink data transmission subsequent to the uplink data transmission is expected" in the message;

- if the AMF decides to forward the uplink data piggybacked in the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message; and

- if the AMF decides to activate the congestion control for transport of user data via the control plane,

then the AMF shall send SERVICE ACCEPT message with the T3448 value IE included.

If the AMF decides to deactivate the congestion control for transport of user data via the control plane, then the AMF shall delete the stored control plane data back-off time for the UE and the AMF shall not include timer T3448 value IE in the SERVICE ACCEPT message.

If the T3448 value IE is present in the received SERVICE ACCEPT message and the value indicates that this timer is neither zero nor deactivated, the UE shall:

a) stop timer T3448 if it is running;

b) consider the transport of user data via the control plane as successful; and

c) start timer T3448 with the value provided in the T3448 value IE.

If the UE is using 5GS services with control plane CIoT 5GS optimization, the T3448 value IE is present in the SERVICE ACCEPT message and the value indicates that this timer is either zero or deactivated, the UE shall ignore the T3448 value IE and proceed as if the T3448 value IE was not present.

If the UE in 5GMM-IDLE mode initiated the service request procedure by sending a CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message and the SERVICE ACCEPT message does not include the T3448 value IE and if timer T3448 is running, then the UE shall stop timer T3448.

For case h) in subclause5.6.1.1,

a) the UE shall treat the indication from the lower layers when the UE has changed to S1 mode as successful completion of the procedure and stop timer T3517;

b) if a UE operating in single-registration mode has changed to S1 mode, it shall disable the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access (see subclause4.9.2); and

c) the AMF shall not check for CAG restrictions.

If the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message is for emergency services fallback, the AMF triggers the emergency services fallback procedure as specified in subclause4.13.4.2 of 3GPPTS23.502[9].

5.6.1.5 Service request procedure not accepted by the network

If the service request cannot be accepted, the network shall return a SERVICE REJECT message to the UE including an appropriate 5GMM cause value.

If the SERVICE REJECT message with 5GMM cause #76 or #78 was received without integrity protection, then the UE shall discard the message.

If the AMF needs to initiate PDU session status synchronisation or a PDU session status IE was included in the SERVICE REQUEST message, the AMF shall include a PDU session status IE in the SERVICE REJECT message to indicate which PDU sessions associated with the access type the SERVICE REJECT message is sent over are active in the AMF. If the PDU session status IE is included in the SERVICE REJECT message and if the message is integrity protected, then:

a) for single access PDU sessions, the UE shall perform a local release of all those PDU sessions which are not in 5GSM state PDU SESSION INACTIVE or PDU SESSION ACTIVE PENDING on the UE side associated with the access type the SERVICE REJECT message is sent over, but are indicated by the AMF as being in 5GSM state PDU SESSION INACTIVE; and

b) for MA PDU sessions, for all those PDU sessions which are not in 5GSM state PDU SESSION INACTIVE or PDU SESSION ACTIVE PENDING and have user plane resources established on the UE side associated with the access the SERVICE REJECT message is sent over, but are indicated by the AMF as no user plane resources established:

1) for MA PDU sessions having user plane resources established only on the access type the SERVICE REJECT message is sent over, the UE shall perform a local release of those MA PDU sessions; and

2) for MA PDU sessions having user plane resources established on both accesses, the UE shall perform a local release on the user plane resources on the access type the SERVICE REJECT message is sent over.

If the service request for mobile originated services is rejected due to general NAS level mobility management congestion control, the network shall set the 5GMM cause value to #22 "congestion" and assign a value for back-off timer T3346.

In NB-N1 mode, if the service request for mobile originated services is rejected due to operator determined barring (see 3GPPTS29.503[20AB]), the network shall set the 5GMM cause value to #22 "congestion" and assign a value for back-off timer T3346.

If the service request from a UE supporting CAG is rejected due to CAG restrictions, the network shall set the 5GMM cause value to #76 "Not authorized for this CAG or authorized for CAG cells only" and should include the "CAG information list" in the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE in the SERVICE REJECT message.

NOTE1: The network cannot be certain that "CAG information list" stored in the UE is updated as result of sending of the SERVICE REJECT message with the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE, as the SERVICE REJECT message is not necessarily delivered to the UE (e.g., due to abnormal radio conditions).

NOTE2: The "CAG information list" can be provided by the AMF and include no entry if no "CAG information list" exists in the subscription.

NOTE2A: If the UE supports extended CAG information list, the CAG information list can be included either in the CAG information list IE or Extended CAG information list IE.

If the UE does not support extended CAG information list, the CAG information list shall not be included in the Extended CAG information list IE.

If the service request from a UE not supporting CAG is rejected due to CAG restrictions, the network shall operate as described in bulleth) of subclause5.6.1.8.

Upon receipt of the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message with uplink data:

- if the AMF decides to not forward the uplink data piggybacked in the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message; and

- if the AMF decides to activate the congestion control for transport of user data via the control plane,

then the AMF shall send a SERVICE REJECT message and set the 5GMM cause value to #22 "congestion" and assign a value for control plane data back-off timer T3448.

If the AMF determines that the UE is in a non-allowed area or is not in an allowed area as specified in subclause5.3.5, then:

a) if the service type IE in the SERVICE REQUEST message is set to "signalling" or "data", the AMF shall send a SERVICE REJECT message with the 5GMM cause value set to #28 "Restricted service area";

b) otherwise, if the service type IE in the SERVICE REQUEST message is set to "mobile terminated services", "emergency services", "emergency services fallback", "high priority access" or "elevated signalling", the AMF shall continue the process as specified in subclause5.6.1.4 unless for other reasons the service request cannot be accepted.

If the service request for mobile originated services is rejected due to service gap control as specified in subclause 5.3.17, i.e. the T3447 timer is running in AMF, the network shall set the 5GMM cause value to #22 "Congestion" and may include T3346 value IE in the SERVICE REJECT message set to the remaining time of the running T3447 timer.

Based on operator policy, if the service request procedure is rejected due to core network redirection for CIoT optimizations, the network shall set the 5GMM cause value to #31 "Redirection to EPC required".

NOTE3: The network can take into account the UE's S1 mode capability, the EPS CIoT network behaviour supported by the UE or the EPS CIoT network behaviour supported by the EPC to determine the rejection with the 5GMM cause value #31 "Redirection to EPC required".

If the service request is via a satellite NG-RAN cell, and the network determines that the UE is in a location where the network is not allowed to operate, see 3GPPTS23.502[9], the network shall set the 5GMM cause value in the SERVICE REJECT message to #78 "PLMN not allowed to operate at the present UE location".

If the service request from a UE supporting MINT is rejected due to a disaster condition no longer being applicable in the current location of the UE, the network shall set the 5GMM cause value to #11 "PLMN not allowed" or #13 "Roaming not allowed in this tracking area" and may include a disaster return wait range in the Disaster return wait range IE in the SERVICE REJECT message.

On receipt of the SERVICE REJECT message, if the UE is in state 5GMM-SERVICE-REQUEST-INITIATED, the UE shall reset the service request attempt counter and stop timer T3517 if running.

Regardless of the 5GMM cause value received in the SERVICE REJECT message,

- if the UE receives the Forbidden TAI(s) for the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" IE in the SERVICE REJECT message and if the TAI(s) included in the IE is not part of the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming", the UE shall store the TAI(s) included in the IE, if not already stored, into the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" and remove the TAI(s) from the stored TAI list if present; and

- if the UE receives the Forbidden TAI(s) for the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service" IE in the SERVICE REJECT message and if the TAI(s) included in the IE is not part of the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service", the UE shall store the TAI(s) included in the IE, if not already stored, into the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service" and remove the TAI(s) from the stored TAI list if present.

Furthermore, the UE shall take the following actions depending on the 5GMM cause value received in the SERVICE REJECT message.

#3 (Illegal UE);

#6 (Illegal ME);

 The UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2) and shall delete any 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and ngKSI.

 In case of PLMN, the UE shall consider the USIM as invalid for 5GS services until switching off, the UICC containing the USIM is removed or the timer T3245 expires as described in clause 5.3.19a.1;

 In case of SNPN, if the UE is not registered for onboarding services in SNPN and the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the UE shall consider the entry of the "list of subscriber data" with the SNPN identity of the current SNPN as invalid until the UE is switched off, the entry is updated or the timer T3245 expires as described in clause 5.3.19a.2. In case of SNPN, if the UE is not registered for onboarding services in SNPN and the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the UE shall consider the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" as invalid for 3GPP access until the UE is switched off, the entry is updated or the timer T3245 expires as described in clause 5.3.19a.2. Additionally, if EAP based primary authentication and key agreement procedure using EAP-AKA' or 5G AKA based primary authentication and key agreement procedure was performed in the current SNPN, the UE shall consider the USIM as invalid for the current SNPN until switching off, the UICC containing the USIM is removed or the timer T3245 expires as described in clause 5.3.19a.2.

 If the UE is not registered for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall delete the list of equivalent PLMNs (if any) and shall enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.NO-SUPI. If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS, then the UE shall:

1) set the counter for "SIM/USIM considered invalid for GPRS services" events and the counter for "USIM considered invalid for 5GS services over non-3GPP access" events to UE implementation-specific maximum value in case of PLMN if the UE maintains these counters;

2) set the counter for "the entry for the current SNPN considered invalid for 3GPP access" events and the counter for "the entry for the current SNPN considered invalid for non-3GPP access" events to UE implementation-specific maximum value in case of SNPN if the UE maintains these counters; and

3) delete the 5GMM parameters stored in non-volatile memory of the ME as specified in annexC.

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in the single-registration mode, the UE shall handle the EMM parameters EMM state, EPS update status, 4G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and eKSI as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] for the case when the service request procedure is rejected with the EMM cause with the same value. The USIM shall be considered as invalid also for non-EPS services until switching off, the UICC containing the USIM is removed or the timer T3245 expires as described in clause 5.3.7a in 3GPP TS 24.301 [15]. If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS and the UE maintains a counter for "SIM/USIM considered invalid for non-GPRS services", then the UE shall set this counter to UE implementation-specific maximum value.

 If the UE is registered for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall store the SNPN identity in the "permanently forbidden SNPNs" list for onboarding services, enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH, and perform an SNPN selection or an SNPN selection for onboarding services according to 3GPPTS23.122[5]. If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS, the UE shall set the SNPN-specific attempt counter to the UE implementation-specific maximum value.

 If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS and the UE also supports the registration procedure over the other access, the UE shall in addition handle 5GMM parameters and 5GMM state for this access, as described for this 5GMM cause value.

#7 (5GS services not allowed).

 The UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2) and shall delete any 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and ngKSI.

 In case of PLMN, the UE shall consider the USIM as invalid for 5GS services until switching off, the UICC containing the USIM is removed or the timer T3245 expires as described in clause 5.3.19a.1;

 In case of SNPN, if the UE is not registered for onboarding services in SNPN and the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the UE shall consider the entry of the "list of subscriber data" with the SNPN identity of the current SNPN as invalid for 5GS services until the UE is switched off, the entry is updated or the timer T3245 expires as described in clause 5.3.19a.2. In case of SNPN, if the UE is not registered for onboarding services in SNPN and the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the UE shall consider the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" as invalid for 3GPP access until the UE is switched off, the entry is updated or the timer T3245 expires as described in clause 5.3.19a.2. Additionally, if EAP based primary authentication and key agreement procedure using EAP-AKA' or 5G AKA based primary authentication and key agreement procedure was performed in the current SNPN, the UE shall consider the USIM as invalid for the current SNPN until switching off, the UICC containing the USIM is removed or the timer T3245 expires as described in clause 5.3.19a.2.

 If the UE is not registered for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.NO-SUPI. If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS, then the UE shall:

1) set the counter for "SIM/USIM considered invalid for GPRS services" events and the counter for "USIM considered invalid for 5GS services over non-3GPP access" events to UE implementation-specific maximum value in case of PLMN if the UE maintains these counters; or

2) set the counter for "the entry for the current SNPN considered invalid for 3GPP access" events and the counter for "the entry for the current SNPN considered invalid for non-3GPP access" events to UE implementation-specific maximum value in case of SNPN if the UE maintains these counters; and

3) delete the 5GMM parameters stored in non-volatile memory of the ME as specified in annexC.

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall handle the EMM parameters EMM state, EPS update status, 4G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and eKSI as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] for the case when the service request procedure is rejected with the EMM cause with the same value.

 If the UE is registered for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall store the SNPN identity in the "permanently forbidden SNPNs" list for onboarding services, enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH, and perform an SNPN selection or an SNPN selection for onboarding services according to 3GPPTS23.122[5]. If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS, the UE shall set the SNPN-specific attempt counter to the UE implementation-specific maximum value.

 If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS and the UE also supports the registration procedure over the other access, the UE shall in addition handle 5GMM parameters and 5GMM state for this access, as described for this 5GMM cause value.

NOTE4: The possibility to configure a UE so that the radio transceiver for a specific radio access technology is not active, although it is implemented in the UE, is outside the scope of the present document.

#9 (UE identity cannot be derived by the network).

 The UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U2 NOT UPDATED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2) and shall delete any 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and ngKSI. The UE shall enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.

 If the service request was initiated for emergency services fallback, the UE shall attempt to select an E-UTRA cell connected to EPC or 5GCN according to the domain priority and selection rules specified in 3GPPTS23.167[6]. If the UE finds a suitable E-UTRA cell, it then proceeds with the appropriate EMM or 5GMM procedures. If the UE operating in single-registration mode has changed to S1 mode, it shall disable the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access.

 If the service request was initiated for any reason other than emergency services fallback or initiating an emergency PDU session, the UE shall perform a new initial registration procedure.

NOTE5: User interaction is necessary in some cases when the UE cannot re-establish the PDU session(s) automatically.

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in the single-registration mode, the UE shall handle the EMM parameters EMM state, EPS update status, 4G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and eKSI as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] for the case when the service request procedure is rejected with the EMM cause with the same value.

#10 (Implicitly de-registered).

 The UE shall enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE. The UE shall delete any mapped 5G NAS security context or partial native 5G NAS security context.

 If the service request was initiated for emergency services fallback, the UE shall attempt to select an E-UTRA cell connected to EPC or 5GCN according to the domain priority and selection rules specified in 3GPPTS23.167[6]. If the UE finds a suitable E-UTRA cell, it then proceeds with the appropriate EMM or 5GMM procedures. If the UE operating in single-registration mode has changed to S1 mode, it shall disable the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access.

 If the rejected request was neither for initiating an emergency PDU session nor for emergency services fallback, the UE shall perform a new initial registration procedure.

NOTE6: User interaction is necessary in some cases when the UE cannot re-establish the PDU session(s) automatically.

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in the single-registration mode, the UE shall handle the EMM state as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] for the case when the service request procedure is rejected with the EMM cause with the same value.

#11 (PLMN not allowed).

 This cause value received from a cell belonging to an SNPN is considered as an abnormal case and the behaviour of the UE is specified in subclause5.6.1.7.

 The UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2) and shall delete any 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and ngKSI. The UE shall delete the list of equivalent PLMNs and store the PLMN identity in the forbidden PLMN list as specified in subclause5.3.13A and if the UE is configured to use timer T3245 then the UE shall start timer T3245 and proceed as described in clause 5.3.19a.1. For 3GPP access, the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH and perform a PLMN selection according to 3GPPTS23.122[5], and for non-3GPP access the UE shall enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE and perform network selection as defined in 3GPPTS24.502[18]. If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS and the UE mantains the PLMN-specific attempt counter and the PLMN-specific attempt counter for non-3GPP access for that PLMN, the UE shall set the PLMN-specific attempt counter and the PLMN-specific attempt counter for non-3GPP access for that PLMN to the UE implementation-specific maximum value.

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall in addition handle the EMM parameters EMM state, EPS update status, 4G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and eKSI as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] for the case when the service request procedure is rejected with the EMM cause with the same value.

 If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS and the UE also supports the registration procedure over the other access to the same PLMN, the UE shall in addition handle 5GMM parameters and 5GMM state for this access, as described for this 5GMM cause value.

 If the UE receives the Disaster return wait range IE in the SERVICE REJECT message and the UE supports MINT, the UE shall delete the disaster return wait range stored in the ME, if any, and store the disaster return wait range included in the Disaster return wait range IE in the ME.

#12 (Tracking area not allowed).

 The UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2) and shall delete 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and ngKSI.

 If:

1) the UE is not operating in SNPN access operation mode, the UE shall store the current TAI in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service" and enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE. If the SERVICE REJECT message is not integrity protected, the UE shall memorize the current TAI was stored in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service" for non-integrity protected NAS reject message; or

2) the UE is operating in SNPN access operation mode, the UE shall store the current TAI in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service" for the current SNPN and, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription, and enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE. If the SERVICE REJECT message is not integrity protected, the UE shall memorize the current TAI was stored in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service" for the current SNPN and, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription, for non-integrity protected NAS reject message.

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall handle the EMM parameters EMM state, EPS update status, 4G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and eKSI as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] for the case when the service request procedure is rejected with the EMM cause with the same value.

#13 (Roaming not allowed in this tracking area).

 The UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2). For 3GPP access the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH, and for non-3GPP access the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE.

 If:

1) the UE is not operating in SNPN access operation mode, the UE shall store the current TAI in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" and remove the current TAI from the stored TAI list if present. If the SERVICE REJECT message is not integrity protected, the UE shall memorize the current TAI was stored in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" for non-integrity protected NAS reject message; or

2) the UE is operating in SNPN access operation mode, the UE shall store the current TAI in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" for the current SNPN and, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription, and remove the current TAI from the stored TAI list if present. If the SERVICE REJECT message is not integrity protected, the UE shall memorize the current TAI was stored in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" for the current SNPN and, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription, for non-integrity protected NAS reject message.

 For 3GPP access the UE shall perform a PLMN selection or SNPN selection according to 3GPPTS23.122[5], and for non-3GPP access the UE shall perform network selection as defined in 3GPPTS24.502[18].

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall handle the EMM parameters EMM state and EPS update status as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] for the case when the service request procedure is rejected with the EMM cause with the same value.

 If the UE receives the Disaster return wait range IE in the SERVICE REJECT message and the UE supports MINT, the UE shall delete the disaster return wait range stored in the ME, if any, and store the disaster return wait range included in the Disaster return wait range IE in the ME.

#15 (No suitable cells in tracking area).

 The UE shall enter the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE.

 If:

1) the UE is not operating in SNPN access operation mode, the UE shall store the current TAI in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" and remove the current TAI from the stored TAI list if present. If the SERVICE REJECT message is not integrity protected, the UE shall memorize the current TAI was stored in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" for non-integrity protected NAS reject message; or

2) the UE is operating in SNPN access operation mode, the UE shall store the current TAI in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" for the current SNPN and, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription, and remove the current TAI from the stored TAI list if present. If the SERVICE REJECT message is not integrity protected, the UE shall memorize the current TAI was stored in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming" for the current SNPN and, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription, for non-integrity protected NAS reject message.

 If the UE initiated service request for emergency services fallback, the UE shall attempt to select an E-UTRA cell connected to EPC or 5GC according to the emergency services support indicator (see 3GPPTS36.331[25A]). If the UE finds a suitable E-UTRA cell, it then proceeds with the appropriate EMM or 5GMM procedures. If the UE operating in single-registration mode has changed to S1 mode, it shall disable the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access.

 If the service request was not initiated for emergency services fallback, the UE shall search for a suitable cell in another tracking area according to 3GPPTS38.304[28] or 3GPPTS36.304[25C].

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in the single-registration mode, the UE shall handle the EMM parameters EMM state and EPS update status as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] for the case when the service request procedure is rejected with the EMM cause with the same value.

 If received over non-3GPP access the cause shall be considered as an abnormal case and the behaviour of the UE for this case is specified in subclause5.6.1.7.

#22 (Congestion).

 If the T3346 value IE is present in the SERVICE REJECT message and the value indicates that this timer is neither zero nor deactivated, the UE shall proceed as described below, otherwise it shall be considered as an abnormal case and the behaviour of the UE for this case is specified in subclause5.6.1.7.

 If the rejected request was not for initiating an emergency PDU session, the UE shall abort the service request procedure and enter state 5GMM-REGISTERED and stop timer T3517 if still running.

 The UE shall stop timer T3346 if it is running.

 If the SERVICE REJECT message is integrity protected, the UE shall start timer T3346 with the value provided in the T3346 value IE.

 If the SERVICE REJECT message is not integrity protected, the UE shall start timer T3346 with a random value from the default range specified in 3GPPTS24.008[12].

 For all other cases the UE stays in the current serving cell and applies normal cell reselection process. The service request procedure is started, if still necessary, when timer T3346 expires or is stopped.

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in the single-registration mode, the UE shall handle the EMM parameters EMM state and EPS update status as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] for the case when the service request procedure is rejected with the EMM cause with the same value.

 If the service request procedure was initiated for an MO MMTEL voice call (i.e. access category 4), or for an MO MMTEL video call (i.e. access category 5) or for an MO IMS registration related signalling (i.e. access category 9), a notification that the service request was not accepted due to congestion shall be provided to the upper layers.

 If the UE is using 5GS services with control plane CIoT 5GS optimization and if the T3448 value IE is present in the SERVICE REJECT message and the value indicates that this timer is neither zero nor deactivated, the UE shall:

a) stop timer T3448 if it is running;

b) consider the transport of user data via the control plane as unsuccessful; and

c) start timer T3448:

1) with the value provided in the T3448 value IE if the SERVICE REJECT message is integrity protected; or

2) with a random value from the default range specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] table10.2.1 if the SERVICE REJECT message is not integrity protected.

 If the UE is using 5GS services with control plane CIoT 5GS optimization, the T3448 value IE is present in the SERVICE REJECT message and the value indicates that this timer is either zero or deactivated, the UE shall ignore the T3448 value IE and:

a) stop timer T3448 if it is running; and

b) consider the transport of user data via the control plane as unsuccessful.

 If the UE is using 5GS services with control plane CIoT 5GS optimization and if the T3448 value IE is not present in the SERVICE REJECT message, it shall be considered as an abnormal case and the behaviour of UE for this case is specified in subclause5.6.1.7.

#27 (N1 mode not allowed).

 The UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2) and shall enter the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE. If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS, the UE shall set:

1) the PLMN-specific N1 mode attempt counter for 3GPP access and the PLMN-specific N1 mode attempt counter for non-3GPP access for that PLMN in case of PLMN; or

2) the SNPN-specific attempt counter for 3GPP access for the current SNPN and the SNPN-specific attempt counter for non-3GPP access for the current SNPN in case of SNPN

 to the UE implementation-specific maximum value.

 The UE shall disable the N1 mode capability for the specific access type for which the message was received (see subclause4.9).

 If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS, the UE shall disable the N1 mode capability also for the other access type (see subclause4.9).

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall in addition set the EPS update status to EU3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED and enter the state EMM-REGISTERED.

#28 (Restricted service area).

 The UE shall enter the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.NON-ALLOWED-SERVICE, wait for the release of the N1 NAS signalling connection and perform the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update if the service type IE in the SERVICE REQUEST message was not set to "elevated signalling" and the SERVICE REJECT message is received over 3GPP access (see subclause5.3.5 and 5.5.1.3).

 If the service type IE in the SERVICE REQUEST message was set to "elevated signalling", the UE shall not re-initiate service request procedure until the UE enters an allowed area or leaves a non-allowed area, except for emergency services, high priority access or responding to paging or notification.

#31 (Redirection to EPC required).

 5GMM cause #31 received by a UE that has not indicated support for CIoT optimizations or received by a UE over non-3GPP access is considered an abnormal case and the behaviour of the UE is specified in subclause5.6.1.7.

 This cause value received from a cell belonging to an SNPN is considered as an abnormal case and the behaviour of the UE is specified in subclause5.6.1.7.

 The UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2). The UE shall reset the service request attempt counter and enter the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE.

 The UE shall enable the E-UTRA capability if it was disabled and disable the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access (see subclause4.9.2).

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall handle the EMM parameters, EMM state, and EPS update status as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] for the case when the service request procedure is rejected with the EMM cause with the same value.

#72 (Non-3GPP access to 5GCN not allowed).

 If the UE initiated the service request procedure over non-3GPP access, the UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2) and shall delete 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and ngKSI for non-3GPP access. Additionally, the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED for non-3GPP access. If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS, the UE shall set:

1) the PLMN-specific N1 mode attempt counter for non-3GPP access for that PLMN in case of PLMN; or

2) the SNPN-specific attempt counter for non-3GPP access for that SNPN in case of SNPN;

 to the UE implementation-specific maximum value.

NOTE7: The 5GMM sublayer states, the 5GMM parameters and the registration status are managed per access type independently, i.e. 3GPP access or non-3GPP access (see subclauses4.7.2 and 5.1.3).

 The UE shall disable the N1 mode capability for non-3GPP access (see subclause4.9.3).

 As an implementation option, if the UE is not currently registered over 3GPP access, the UE may enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH in order to perform a PLMN selection according to 3GPPTS23.122[5].

 If received over 3GPP access the cause shall be considered as an abnormal case and the behaviour of the UE for this case is specified in subclause5.6.1.7.

#73 (Serving network not authorized).

 This cause value received from a cell belonging to an SNPN is considered as an abnormal case and the behaviour of the UE is specified in subclause5.6.1.7.

 The UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2) and shall delete any 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and ngKSI. The UE shall delete the list of equivalent PLMNs, store the PLMN identity in the forbidden PLMN list as specified in subclause5.3.13A. For 3GPP access the UE shall enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH in order to perform a PLMN selection according to 3GPPTS23.122[5], and for non-3GPP access the UE shall enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE in order to perform network selection as defined in 3GPPTS24.502[18]. If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS, the UE shall set the PLMN-specific attempt counter and the PLMN-specific attempt counter for non-3GPP access for that PLMN to the UE implementation-specific maximum value.

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall in addition set the EPS update status to EU3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED, enter the state EMM-DEREGISTERED and shall delete any 4G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and eKSI.

#74 (Temporarily not authorized for this SNPN).

 5GMM cause #74 is only applicable when received from a cell belonging to an SNPN. 5GMM cause #74 received from a cell not belonging to an SNPN is considered as an abnormal case and the behaviour of the UE is specified in subclause5.6.1.7.

 The UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2) and shall delete any 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and ngKSI. The UE shall store the SNPN identity in the "temporarily forbidden SNPNs" list for the specific access type for which the message was received and, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription. If the UE is not registered for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH and perform an SNPN selection according to 3GPPTS23.122[5]. If the UE is registered for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH and perform an SNPN selection or an SNPN selection for onboarding services according to 3GPPTS23.122[5]. If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS, the UE shall set the SNPN-specific attempt counter for 3GPP access and the SNPN-specific attempt counter for non-3GPP access for the current SNPN to the UE implementation-specific maximum value.

 If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS and the UE also supports the registration procedure over the other access to the same SNPN, the UE shall in addition handle 5GMM parameters and 5GMM state for this access, as described for this 5GMM cause value.

NOTE8: When 5GMM cause #74 is received over 3GPP access, the term "other access" in "the UE also supports the registration procedure over the other access to the same SNPN" is used to express access to SNPN services via a PLMN.

NOTE9: The term "non-3GPP access" in an SNPN refers to the case where the UE is accessing SNPN services via a PLMN.

#75 (Permanently not authorized for this SNPN).

 5GMM cause #75 is only applicable when received from a cell belonging to an SNPN with a globally-unique SNPN identity. 5GMM cause #75 received from a cell not belonging to an SNPN or a cell belonging to an SNPN with a non-globally-unique SNPN identity is considered as an abnormal case and the behaviour of the UE is specified in subclause5.6.1.7.

 The UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2) and shall delete any 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and ngKSI. The UE shall store the SNPN identity in the "permanently forbidden SNPNs" list for the specific access type for which the message was received and, if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription. If the UE is not registered for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH and perform an SNPN selection according to 3GPPTS23.122[5]. If the UE is registered for onboarding services in SNPN, the UE shall enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH and perform an SNPN selection or an SNPN selection for onboarding services according to 3GPPTS23.122[5]. If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS, the UE shall set the SNPN-specific attempt counter for 3GPP access and the SNPN-specific attempt counter for non-3GPP access for the current SNPN to the UE implementation-specific maximum value.

 If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the NAS and the UE also supports the registration procedure over the other access to the same SNPN, the UE shall in addition handle 5GMM parameters and 5GMM state for this access, as described for this 5GMM cause value.

NOTE10: When 5GMM cause #75 is received over 3GPP access, the term "other access" in "the UE also supports the registration procedure over the other access to the same SNPN" is used to express access to SNPN services via a PLMN.

NOTE11: The term "non-3GPP access" in an SNPN refers to the case where the UE is accessing SNPN services via a PLMN.

#76 (Not authorized for this CAG or authorized for CAG cells only).

 This cause value received via non-3GPP access or from a cell belonging to an SNPN is considered as an abnormal case and the behaviour of the UE is specified in subclause5.6.1.7.

 The UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3.ROAMING NOT ALLOWED, store the 5GS update status according to clause5.1.3.2.2.

 If 5GMM cause #76 is received from:

1) a CAG cell, and if the UE receives a "CAG information list" in the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE included in the SERVICE REJECT message, the UE shall:

i) replace the "CAG information list" stored in the UE with the received "CAG information list" when received in the HPLMN or EHPLMN;

ii) replace the serving VPLMN's entry of the "CAG information list" stored in the UE with the serving VPLMN's entry of the received CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE when the UE receives the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE in a serving PLMN other than the HPLMN or EHPLMN; or

NOTE12: When the UE receives the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE in a serving PLMN other than the HPLMN or EHPLMN, entries of a PLMN other than the serving VPLMN, if any, in the received CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE are ignored.

iii) remove the serving VPLMN's entry of the "CAG information list" stored in the UE when the UE receives the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE in a serving PLMN other than the HPLMN or EHPLMN and the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE does not contain the serving VPLMN's entry.

 Otherwise, the UE shall delete the CAG-ID from the "allowed CAG list" for the current PLMN. In the case the "allowed CAG list" for the current PLMN only contains a range of CAG-IDs, how the UE deletes the CAG-ID(s) of the cell from the "allowed CAG list" for the current PLMN is up to UE implementation. In addition:

i) if the entry in the "CAG information list" for the current PLMN does not include an "indication that the UE is only allowed to access 5GS via CAG cells" or if the entry in the "CAG information list" for the current PLMN includes an "indication that the UE is only allowed to access 5GS via CAG cells" and the updated "allowed CAG list" for the current PLMN includes one or more CAG-IDs, then the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE and shall search for a suitable cell according to 3GPPTS38.304[28] or 3GPPTS36.304[25C] with the updated "CAG information list";

ii) if the entry in the "CAG information list" for the current PLMN includes an "indication that the UE is only allowed to access 5GS via CAG cells" and the updated "allowed CAG list" for the current PLMN does not include any CAG-ID, then the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH and shall apply the PLMN selection process defined in 3GPP TS 23.122 [5] with the updated "CAG information list"; or

iii) if the "CAG information list" does not include an entry for the current PLMN, then the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE and shall search for a suitable cell according to 3GPPTS38.304[28] or 3GPPTS36.304[25C] with the updated "CAG information list".

2) a non-CAG cell, and if the UE receives a "CAG information list" in the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE included in the SERVICE REJECT message, the UE shall:

i) replace the "CAG information list" stored in the UE with the received "CAG information list" when received in the HPLMN or EHPLMN;

ii) replace the serving VPLMN's entry of the "CAG information list" stored in the UE with the serving VPLMN's entry of the received CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE when the UE receives the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE in a serving PLMN other than the HPLMN or EHPLMN; or

NOTE13: When the UE receives the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE in a serving PLMN other than the HPLMN or EHPLMN, entries of a PLMN other than the serving VPLMN, if any, in the received CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE are ignored.

iii) remove the serving VPLMN's entry of the "CAG information list" stored in the UE when the UE receives the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE in a serving PLMN other than the HPLMN or EHPLMN and the CAG information list IE or the Extended CAG information list IE does not contain the serving VPLMN's entry.

 Otherwise, the UE shall store an "indication that the UE is only allowed to access 5GS via CAG cells" in the entry of the "CAG information list" for the current PLMN, if any. If the "CAG information list" stored in the UE does not include the current PLMN's entry, the UE shall add an entry for the current PLMN to the "CAG information list" and store an "indication that the UE is only allowed to access 5GS via CAG cells" in the entry of the "CAG information list" for the current PLMN. If the UE does not have a stored "CAG information list", the UE shall create a new "CAG information list" and add an entry with an "indication that the UE is only allowed to access 5GS via CAG cells" for the current PLMN.

In addition:

i) if the "allowed CAG list" for the current PLMN includes one or more CAG-IDs, then the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE and shall search for a suitable cell according to 3GPPTS38.304[28] with the updated CAG information; or

ii) if the "allowed CAG list" for the current PLMN does not include any CAG-ID, then the UE shall enter the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH and shall apply the PLMN selection process defined in 3GPP TS 23.122 [5] with the updated "CAG information list".

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall in addition set the EPS update status to EU3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED, reset the service request attempt counter and enter the state EMM-REGISTERED.

#77 (Wireline access area not allowed).

 5GMM cause #77 is only applicable when received from a wireline access network by the 5G-RG or the W-AGF acting on behalf of the FN-CRG (or on behalf of the N5GC device). 5GMM cause #77 received from a 5G access network other than a wireline access network and 5GMM cause #77 received by the W-AGF acting on behalf of the FN-BRG are considered as abnormal cases and the behaviour of the UE is specified in subclause5.6.1.7.

 When received over wireline access network, the 5G-RG and the W-AGF acting on behalf of the FN-CRG (or on behalf of the N5GC device) shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2), shall delete 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and ngKSI, shall enter the state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED and shall act as specified in subclause5.3.23.

NOTE14: The 5GMM sublayer states, the 5GMM parameters and the registration status are managed per access type independently, i.e. 3GPP access or non-3GPP access (see subclauses4.7.2 and 5.1.3).

#78 (PLMN not allowed to operate at the present UE location).

 This cause value received from a non-satellite NG-RAN cell is considered as an abnormal case and the behaviour of the UE is specified in subclause5.6.1.7.

 The UE shall set the 5GS update status to 5U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause5.1.3.2.2) and shall delete 5G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and ngKSI. Additionally, the UE shall reset the registration attempt counter. The UE shall store the PLMN identity and, if it is known, the current geographical location in the list of "PLMNs not allowed to operate at the present UE location" and shall start a corresponding timer instance (see subclause4.23.2). The UE shall enter state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH and perform a PLMN selection according to 3GPPTS23.122[5].

 If the message was received via 3GPP access and the UE is operating in single-registration mode, the UE shall handle the EMM parameters EMM state, EPS update status, 4G-GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and eKSI as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15] for the case when the service request procedure is rejected with the EMM cause with the same value.

5.6.1.6 Service request procedure for initiating an emergency PDU session not accepted by the network

If the service request for initiating an emergency PDU session cannot be accepted by the network, the UE shall perform the procedures as described in subclause5.6.1.5. Then if the UE is in the same selected PLMN where the last service request was attempted, the UE shall:

a) inform the upper layers of the failure of the procedure; or

NOTE1: This can result in the upper layers requesting another emergency call attempt using domain selection as specified in 3GPPTS23.167[6].

b) de-register locally, if not de-registered already, attempt initial registration for emergency services.

If the service request for initiating an emergency PDU session fails due to abnormal cases a) in subclause5.6.1.7, the UE shall perform the procedures as described in subclause5.6.1.7. Then if the UE is in the same selected PLMN where the last SERVICE REQUEST message was attempted, the UE shall:

a) inform the upper layers of the failure of the procedure; or

NOTE2: This can result in the upper layers requesting another emergency call attempt using domain selection as specified in 3GPPTS23.167[6] and 3GPPTS24.229[14].

b) de-register locally, if not de-registered already, attempt initial registration for emergency services.

5.6.1.6A Service request procedure for an emergency services fallback not accepted by the network

If the service request for initiating an emergency services fallback cannot be accepted by the network, the UE shall perform the procedures as described in subclause5.6.1.5 and if the UE does not attempt to select an E-UTRA cell connected to EPC or 5GCN as described in subclause5.6.1.5 and is camped on NR or E-UTRA cell connected to 5GCN in the same PLMN where the last service request was attempted, the UE shall inform the upper layers of the failure of the procedure.

NOTE1: This can result in the upper layers requesting another emergency call attempt using domain selection as specified in 3GPPTS23.167[6].

If the service request for initiating an emergency services fallback fails due to abnormal cases a) in subclause5.6.1.7, the UE shall inform the upper layers of the failure of the emergency services fallback.

NOTE2: This can result in the upper layers requesting another emergency call attempt using domain selection as specified in 3GPPTS23.167[6].

If the service request procedure for initiating an emergency services fallback fails due to abnormal cases other than a) in subclause5.6.1.7, the UE may abort the service request procedure, if not aborted already and attempt to select an E-UTRA cell connected to EPC or 5GCN according to the domain priority and selection rules specified in 3GPP TS 23.167 [6]. If the UE finds a suitable E-UTRA cell, it then proceeds with the appropriate EMM or 5GMM procedures. If the UE operating in single-registration mode has changed to S1 mode, it shall disable the N1 mode capability for 3GPP access.

5.6.1.7 Abnormal cases in the UE

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a) T3517 expired.

 The UE shall enter the state 5GMM-REGISTERED.

 If the UE triggered the service request procedure in 5GMM-IDLE mode sending a:

1) SERVICE REQUEST message and the service type of the SERVICE REQUEST message was not set to "emergency services fallback"; or

2) CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message and the control plane service type of the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message was not set to "emergency services fallback";

 then the 5GMM sublayer shall increment the service request attempt counter, abort the procedure and release locally any resources allocated for the service request procedure. The service request attempt counter shall not be incremented, if:

1) the service request procedure is initiated to establish an emergency PDU session;

2) the UE has an emergency PDU session established;

3) the UE is a UE configured for high priority access in selected PLMN;

4) the service request procedure is initiated in response to paging or notification from the network; or

5) the UE in NB-N1 mode is requested by the upper layer to transmit user data related to an exceptional event and the UE is allowed to use exception data reporting (see the ExceptionDataReportingAllowed leaf of the NAS configuration MO in 3GPPTS24.368[17] or the USIM file EFNASCONFIG in 3GPPTS31.102[22]).

 If the service request attempt counter is greater than or equal to 5, the UE shall start timer T3525. Additionally, if the service request procedure was initiated for an MO MMTEL voice call or for an MO MMTEL video call or for an MO IMS registration related signalling, a notification that the service request was not initiated due to the UE having started timer T3525 shall be provided to the upper layers.

NOTE1: This can result in the upper layers requesting implementation specific mechanisms, e.g. the MMTEL voice call being attempted to another IP-CAN, or establishment of a CS voice call (if supported and not already attempted in the CS domain).

 The UE shall not attempt service request until expiry of timer T3525 unless:

1) the service request procedure is initiated in response to paging or notification from the network;

2) the UE is a UE configured for high priority access in selected PLMN;

3) the service request procedure is initiated to establish an emergency PDU session;

4) the UE has an emergency PDU session established;

5) the service request procedure is initiated for emergency services fallback;

6) the UE is registered in a new PLMN; or

NOTE2: According to Table10.2.1, when "UE camped on a new PLMN other than the PLMN on which timer started", timer T3525 is stopped, hence this check may be skipped.

7) the UE in NB-N1 mode is requested by the upper layer to transmit user data related to an exceptional event and the UE is allowed to use exception data reporting (see the ExceptionDataReportingAllowed leaf of the NAS configuration MO in 3GPPTS24.368[17] or the USIM file EFNASCONFIG in 3GPPTS31.102[22]).

NOTE3: The NAS signalling connection can also be released if the UE deems that the network has failed the authentication check as specified in subclause5.4.1.3.7.

 If the UE triggered the service request procedure in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode sending a:

1) SERVICE REQUEST message and the service type of the SERVICE REQUEST message was not set to "emergency services fallback"; or

2) CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message and the control plane service type of the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message was not set to "emergency services fallback",

 the 5GMM sublayer shall abort the procedure, and stay in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode.

 If the service type of the SERVICE REQUEST message was set to "emergency services fallback" or the control plane service type of the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message was set to "emergency services fallback" and:

1) the service request procedure was triggered in 5GMM-IDLE mode, the 5GMM sublayer shall abort the procedure, release locally any resources allocated for the service request procedure; or

2) the service request procedure was triggered in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode, the 5GMM sublayer shall abort the procedure, stay in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode.

b) The lower layers indicate that the access attempt is barred.

 The UE shall not start the service request procedure. The UE stays in the current serving cell and applies the normal cell reselection process. Receipt of the access barred indication shall not trigger the selection of a different core network type (EPC or 5GCN).

 The service request procedure is started, if still needed, when the lower layers indicate that the barring is alleviated for the access category with which the access attempt was associated.

ba) The lower layers indicate that:

1) access barring is applicable for all access categories except categories 0 and 2 and the access category with which the access attempt was associated is other than 0 and 2; or

2) access barring is applicable for all access categories except category 0 and the access category with which the access attempt was associated is other than 0.

 If the SERVICE REQUEST message or CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST has not been sent, the UE shall proceed as specified for case b.

 If the SERVICE REQUEST message or CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST has been sent:

1) the UE shall abort the service request procedure and stop timer T3517. The UE stays in the current serving cell and applies the normal cell reselection process; and

2) the service request procedure is started, if still needed, when the lower layers indicate that the barring is alleviated for the access category with which the access attempt was associated.

 For additional UE requirements for both cases see subclause4.5.5.

c) Timer T3346 is running.

 The UE shall not start the service request procedure unless:

1) the UE receives a paging;

2) the UE receives a NOTIFICATION message over non-3GPP access when the UE is in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode over non-3GPP access and in 5GMM-IDLE mode over 3GPP access;

3) the UE receives a NOTIFICATION message over 3GPP access when the UE is in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode over 3GPP access and in 5GMM-IDLE mode over non-3GPP access;

4) the UE is a UE configured for high priority access in selected PLMN;

5) the UE has an emergency PDU session established or is establishing an emergency PDU session;

6) the service request procedure is initiated for emergency services fallback;

7) the service request procedure is initiated for elevated signalling;

8) the UE in NB-N1 mode is requested by the upper layer to transmit user data related to an exceptional event and:

- the UE is allowed to use exception data reporting (see the ExceptionDataReportingAllowed leaf of the NAS configuration MO in 3GPPTS24.368[17] or the USIM file EFNASCONFIG in 3GPPTS31.102[22]); and

- timer T3346 was not started when N1 NAS signalling connection was established with RRC establishment cause set to "mo-ExceptionData"; or

9) the MUSIM UE is in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode and requests the network to release the NAS signalling connection (see case o in subclause5.6.1.1).

 If the UE is in 5GMM-IDLE mode, the UE stays in the current serving cell and applies normal cell reselection process. The service request procedure is started, if still necessary, when timer T3346 expires or is stopped.

 If the service request procedure was triggered for an MO MMTEL voice call (i.e. access category 4), or for an MO MMTEL video call (i.e. access category 5) or for an MO IMS registration related signalling (i.e. access category 9), a notification that the service request procedure was not initiated due to congestion shall be provided to the upper layers.

 If the UE receives a paging with access type set to "Non-3GPP access" and the non-3GPP access is available and UE is in 5GMM-REGISTERED.NORMAL SERVICE over non-3GPP access, the UE shall stop timer T3346 and send the SERVICE REQUEST message over non-3GPP access.

d) Registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update is triggered.

 The UE shall abort the service request procedure, stop timer T3517, if running and perform the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update. The Follow-on request indicator in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message shall be handled as specified in clause5.5.1.3.2.

e) Switch off.

 If the UE is in state 5GMM-SERVICE-REQUEST-INITIATED at switch off, the de-registration procedure shall be performed.

f) De-registration procedure collision.

 If the UE receives a DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message from the network in state 5GMM-SERVICE-REQUEST-INITIATED, the UE shall progress the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message and the service request procedure shall be aborted.

NOTE4: The above collision case is valid if the DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message indicates the access type over which the service request procedure is attempted otherwise both the procedures are progressed.

g) Transmission failure of SERVICE REQUEST or CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message indication with change in the current TAI.

 If the current TAI is not in the TAI list, UE shall abort the service request procedure to perform the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update as specified in subclause5.5.1.3.2.

If the current TAI is part of the TAI list, the UE shall restart the service request procedure unless the service request procedure is initiated for case o) or p) in subclause5.6.1.1. For case o) and p) in subclause5.6.1.1 the UE shall abort the service request procedure, enters state 5GMM-REGISTERED, locally release the N1 NAS signalling connection, stop timer T3517 and locally release any resources allocated for the service request procedure.

h) Transmission failure of SERVICE REQUEST or CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message indication without change in the current TAI.

 The UE shall restart the service request procedure unless the service request procedure is initiated for case o) or p) in subclause5.6.1.1. For case o) and p) in subclause5.6.1.1 the UE shall abort the service request procedure, enters state 5GMM-REGISTERED, locally release the N1 NAS signalling connection, stop timer T3517 and locally release any resources allocated for the service request procedure.

i) SERVICE REJECT message received with other 5GMM cause values than those treated in subclause5.6.1.5, and cases of 5GMM cause values #11, #15, #22, #31, #72, #73, #74, #75, #76, #77 and #78 that are considered as abnormal cases according to subclause5.6.1.5.

 The UE shall enter state 5GMM-REGISTERED.

 The UE shall abort the service request procedure, stop timer T3517 and locally release any resources allocated for the service request procedure.

j) The UE in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode with RRC inactive indication over the 3GPP access, and in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode over non-3GPP access, receives a NOTIFICATION message over the non-3GPP access with access type indicating 3GPP access.

 The UE shall transition from 5GMM-CONNECTED mode with RRC inactive indication to 5GMM-IDLE mode over 3GPP access and initiate the service request procedure over the 3GPP access.

k) Timer T3447 is running

 The UE shall not start any service request procedure unless:

1) the UE in 5GMM-IDLE receives a paging request;

2) the UE is a UE configured for high priority access;

3) the UE has a PDU session for emergency services established or is establishing a PDU session for emergency services;

4) the service request procedure is initiated for emergency services fallback;

5) the UE in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode receives mobile terminated signalling or downlink data over the user-plane;

6) the service request procedure is initiated for elevated signalling; or

7) the MUSIM UE requests the network to release the NAS signalling connection (see case o in subclause5.6.1.1).

 The UE stays in the current serving cell and applies the normal cell reselection process. The service request procedure is started, if still necessary, when timer T3447 expires or timer T3447 is stopped.

l) Lower layer failure, release of the N1 signalling connection received from lower layers or the lower layers indicate that the RRC connection has been suspended before the service request procedure is completed or SERVICE REJECT message is received.

 The UE shall abort the service request procedure, stop timer T3517, locally release any resources allocated for the service request procedure and enters state 5GMM-REGISTERED. For case m) in subclause5.6.1.1 the UE may retry the service request procedure a certain number of times (maximum re-attempts 5).

m) Timer T3448 is running

 The UE in 5GMM-IDLE mode shall not initiate the service request procedure for transport of user data via the control plane unless:

1) the UE is a UE configured for high priority access in selected PLMN;

2) the UE which is only using 5GS services with control plane CIoT 5GS optimization received a paging request;

3) the UE in NB-N1 mode is requested by the upper layer to transmit user data related to an exceptional event and the UE is allowed to use exception data reporting (see the ExceptionDataReportingAllowed leaf of the NAS configuration MO in 3GPPTS24.368[17] or the USIM file EFNASCONFIG in 3GPPTS31.102[22]); or

4) the UE is initiating the service request procedure to request emergency services or emergency services fallback.

 The UE stays in the current serving cell and applies the normal cell reselection process. The service request procedure is started, if still necessary, when timer T3448 expires.

5.6.1.8 Abnormal cases on the network side

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a) Lower layer failure.

 If a lower layer failure occurs before a SERVICE REJECT message has been sent to the UE or the service request procedure has been completed by the AMF, the AMF enters/stays in 5GMM-IDLE.

b) Protocol error.

 If the SERVICE REQUEST message or the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message is received with a protocol error, the AMF shall return a SERVICE REJECT message with one of the following 5GMM cause values:

#96 invalid mandatory information;

#99 information element non-existent or not implemented;

#100 conditional IE error; or

#111 protocol error, unspecified.

 The AMF stays in the current 5GMM mode.

c) More than one SERVICE REQUEST message or CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message received before the procedure has been completed (i.e., before SERVICE REJECT message has been sent or service request procedure has been completed).

- If one or more of the information elements in the SERVICE REQUEST message or CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message differs from the ones received within the previous SERVICE REQUEST message or CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message, the previously initiated service request procedure shall be aborted, and the new service request procedure shall be progressed;

- If the information elements do not differ, then the AMF shall continue with the previous service request procedure and shall not treat any further this SERVICE REQUEST message or this CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message.

d) REGISTRATION REQUEST message received with "initial registration" or "emergency registration" in the 5GS registration type IE before a SERVICE REJECT message has been sent or the service request procedure has been completed.

 If a REGISTRATION REQUEST message with "initial registration" or "emergency registration" in the 5GS registration type IE is received and the service request procedure has not been completed or a SERVICE REJECT message has not been sent, the AMF may initiate the 5GMM common procedures, e.g. the primary authentication and key agreement procedure. The AMF may e.g. after a successful primary authentication and key agreement procedure execution, abort the service request procedure, delete the 5GMM context, indicate towards the SMF that the 5GMM context has been deleted and progress the new REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

e) REGISTRATION REQUEST message received with "mobility registration updating" or "periodic registration updating" in the 5GS registration type IE received before the service request procedure has been completed or a SERVICE REJECT message has been sent.

 If a REGISTRATION REQUEST message with "mobility registration updating" or "periodic registration updating" in the 5GS registration type IE is received and the service request procedure has not been completed or a SERVICE REJECT message has not been sent, the AMF may initiate the 5GMM common procedures, e.g. the primary authentication and key agreement procedure. The AMF may e.g. after a successful primary authentication and key agreement procedure execution, abort the service request procedure and progress the new REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

f) If a CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message with Control plane service type indicating "mobile originating request" is received after the AMF initiated a paging procedure, the AMF shall treat this CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST as a paging response and handle the message according to subclauses5.6.1.4 and 5.6.1.5.

g) CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message received with the Data type field indicates "control plane user data" in the CIoT small data container IE or received with Payload container type IE set to "CIoT user data container" and:

1) the AMF does not have a PDU session routing context for the PDU session ID and the UE; or

2) the AMF unsuccessfully attempted to forward the user data container and the PDU session ID,

 then the AMF may send back to the UE the CIoT user data container or control plane user data which was not forwarded as specified in subclause5.4.5.3.1 case l1) or case l2).

h) Based on operator policy, if the service request from a UE not supporting CAG is rejected due to CAG restrictions, the network shall reject the service request with a 5GMM cause value other than the 5GMM cause #76 (Not authorized for this CAG or authorized for CAG cells only).

NOTE: 5GMM cause #7 (5GS services not allowed), 5GMM cause #11 (PLMN not allowed), 5GMM cause #27 (N1 mode not allowed), 5GMM cause #73 (Serving network not authorized) can be used depending on the subscription of the UE and whether the UE roams or not.

5.6.2 Paging procedure

5.6.2.1 General

The paging procedure is performed only in 3GPP access and used by the network to request the establishment of a NAS signalling connection to the UE. The paging procedure is also used by the network to request the UE to re-establish the user-plane resources of PDU sessions for downlink user data transport. Another purpose of the paging procedure is to request the UE to re-establish the user-plane resources of PDU session(s) associated with non-3GPP access over 3GPP access.

Additionally, the network can use the paging procedure to initiate the mobile terminating SMS.

For the UE using eDRX, the network initiates the paging procedure when NAS signalling messages or user data is pending to be sent to the UE within the paging time window and requests the lower layers to include the eDRX cycle length and paging time window length in the paging message. If NAS signalling messages or user data is pending to be sent to the UE outside the paging time window and the eDRX value that the network provides to the UE in the Negotiated extended DRX parameters IE during the last registration procedure indicates:

a) the eDRX cycle length duration of the E-UTRA cell connected to 5GCN, is higher than 5.12 seconds; or

b) the eDRX cycle length duration of the NR cell connected to 5GCN, is higher than 10.24 seconds,

the network initiates the paging procedure at T time ahead of the beginning of the next paging time window.

NOTE: T time is a short time period based on implementation. The operator can take possible imperfections in the synchronization between the 5GCN and the UE into account when choosing T time.

If the network detects that the pending user data to be sent to the UE is related to the voice service as specified in 3GPPTS23.502[9] and the network decides to initiate the paging procedure based on the stored paging restriction information, if any, the AMF should request the lower layer to include the Voice Service Indication in the paging message when the UE and the network support the paging indication for voice services.

5.6.2.2 Paging for 5GS services

5.6.2.2.1 General

The network shall initiate the paging procedure for 5GS services when NAS signalling messages or user data is pending to be sent to the UE in 5GMM-IDLE mode over 3GPP access (see example in figure5.6.2.2.1.1) and there is no paging restriction applied in the network for that paging.



Figure5.6.2.2.1.1: Paging procedure

To initiate the procedure the 5GMM entity in the AMF requests the lower layer to start paging and shall start timer T3513.

If downlink signalling or user data is pending to be sent over non-3GPP access, the 5GMM entity in the AMF shall indicate to the lower layer that the paging is associated to non-3GPP access.

The network shall not page the UE to re-establish user-plane resources of PDU session(s) associated with non-3GPP access over 3GPP access if all the PDU sessions of the UE that are established over the 3GPP access are associated with control plane only indication.

If the network has downlink user data pending for a UE, the AMF has stored paging restriction of the UE and the Paging restriction type in the stored paging restriction is set to:

a) "All paging is restricted", the network should not page the UE;

b) "All paging is restricted except for voice service", the network should page the UE only when:

1) the pending downlink user data for the UE is considered as voice service related by the network;

c) "All paging is restricted except for specified PDU session(s)", the network should page the UE only when:

1) for PDU session(s) that paging is not restricted based on the stored paging restriction, the network has downlink user data pending; or

d) "All paging is restricted except for voice service and specified PDU session(s)", the network should page the UE only when:

1) the pending downlink user data for the UE is considered as voice service related by the network; or

2) for PDU session(s) that paging is not restricted based on the stored paging restriction, the network has downlink user data pending.

If the network has downlink signalling pending for a UE and the AMF has stored paging restriction of the UE and the Paging restriction type in the stored paging restriction is set to:

a) "All paging is restricted", the network should not page the UE;

b) "All paging is restricted except for voice service", the network should page the UE only when:

1) the pending downlink signalling for the UE is 5GMM signalling or 5GSM signalling of the PDU session of voice service;

c) "All paging is restricted except for specified PDU session(s)", the network should page the UE only when:

1) the pending downlink signalling for the UE is 5GMM signalling; or

2) for PDU session(s) that paging is not restricted based on the stored paging restriction, the network has downlink 5GSM signalling pending; or

d) "All paging is restricted except for voice service and specified PDU session(s)", the network should page the UE only when:

1) the pending downlink signalling for the UE is 5GMM signalling or 5GSM signalling of the PDU session of voice service; or

2) for PDU session(s) that paging is not restricted based on the stored paging restriction, the network has downlink 5GSM signalling pending.

NOTE1: If the network pages the UE due to downlink signalling pending, the network initiates the release of the N1 NAS signalling connection after network-requested procedure is completed.

The 5GMM entity in the AMF may provide the lower layer with the "allowed CAG list" and an "indication that the UE is only allowed to access 5GS via CAG cells" for the current PLMN, if available, and with the "allowed CAG list" and an "indication that the UE is only allowed to access 5GS via CAG cells" per equivalent PLMN, if available. If there is an active emergency PDU session, the 5GMM entity in the AMF shall not provide the lower layer with the "allowed CAG list" and an "indication that the UE is only allowed to access 5GS via CAG cells" for the current PLMN, even if available, or with the "allowed CAG list" and an "indication that the UE is only allowed to access 5GS via CAG cells" per equivalent PLMN, even if available.

Upon reception of a paging indication, the UE shall stop the timer T3346, if running, and:

a) if control plane CIoT 5GS optimization is not used by the UE, the UE shall:

1) initiate a service request procedure over 3GPP access to respond to the paging as specified in subclauses5.6.1.2.1 if the UE is in 5GMM-REGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE or 5GMM-REGISTERED.NON-ALLOWED-SERVICE (as described in subclause5.3.5.2) state and the UE is in the 5GMM-IDLE mode without suspend indication;

2) initiate a service request procedure over non-3GPP access to respond to the paging as specified in subclauses5.6.1;

3) initiate a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update over 3GPP access to respond to the paging as specified in subclauses5.5.1.3.2; or

4) proceed as specified in subclause5.3.1.5 if the UE is in the 5GMM-IDLE mode with suspend indication; or

b) if control plane CIoT 5GS optimization is used by the UE, the UE shall:

1) initiate a service request procedure as specified in subclause5.6.1.2.2 if the UE is in the 5GMM-IDLE mode without suspend indication;

2) initiate a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update over 3GPP access as specified in subclauses5.5.1.3.2; or

3) proceed as specified in subclause5.3.1.5 if the UE is in the 5GMM-IDLE mode with suspend indication.

NOTE2: If the UE is in the 5GMM-IDLE mode without suspend indication and has an uplink user data to be sent to the network using control plane CIoT 5GS optimization when receiving the paging indication, the UE can piggyback the uplink user data during the service request procedure initiated to respond to the paging, as specified in subclause5.6.1.2.2.

The MUSIM UE based on implementation may use the paging cause indicated by lower layers (see 3GPPTS38.331[30]), if any, to accept the paging, reject the paging or ignore the paging indication.

Upon reception of a paging indication, if the network supports the rejection of paging request and if a MUSIM UE decides not to accept the paging, the UE may initiate a service request procedure to reject the paging as specified in clause5.6.1.1.

NOTE3: As an implementation option, MUSIM UE is allowed to not respond to paging based on the information available in the paging message, e.g. voice service indication.

If TMGI is used as paging identity and the TMGI matches with MBS multicast session which the has UE joined, the UE shall respond to the paging. Otherwise, the UE shall not respond to the paging.

The network shall stop timer T3513 for the paging procedure when an integrity-protected response is received from the UE and successfully integrity checked by the network or when the 5GMM entity in the AMF receives an indication from the lower layer that it has received the NGAP UE context resume request message as specified in 3GPPTS38.413[31]. If the response received is not integrity protected, or the integrity check is unsuccessful, timer T3513 for the paging procedure shall be kept running unless:

a) the UE is registered for emergency services;

b) the UE has an emergency PDU session; or

c) the response received is a REGISTRATION REQUEST message for mobility and periodic registration update and the security mode control procedure or authentication procedure performed during mobility and periodic registration update has completed successfully.

Upon expiry of timer T3513, the network may reinitiate paging.

If the network, while waiting for a response to the paging sent without paging priority, receives downlink signalling or downlink data associated with priority user-plane resources for PDU sessions, the network shall stop timer T3513, and then initiate the paging procedure with paging priority.

5.6.2.2.2 Abnormal cases on the network side

The following abnormal case can be identified:

a) Void.

5.6.2.2.3 Abnormal cases in the UE

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a) Paging message received with access type set to non-3GPP access while the UE is in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode over non-3GPP access.

 The UE shall not respond to paging message.

b) Paging message received with access type set to 3GPP access when UE-initiated 5GMM specific procedure or service request procedure is ongoing.

 The UE shall proceed with 5GMM specific procedure or service request procedure. If for these procedures lower layers indicate that the access attempt is barred, then the UE shall handle the pending paging message as specified in subclause5.6.2.2.1. Otherwise, the UE shall ignore the paging once lower layers confirm the establishment of the signalling connection.

5.6.3 Notification procedure

5.6.3.1 General

The notification procedure is used by the network:

a) to request the UE, by sending the NOTIFICATION message over 3GPP access, to re-establish the user-plane resources of PDU session(s) associated with non-3GPP access over 3GPP access or to deliver 5GSM downlink signalling messages associated with non-3GPP access over 3GPP access when the UE is in 5GMM-IDLE mode over non-3GPP access and in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode over 3GPP access; or

b) to request the UE, by sending the NOTIFICATION message over non-3GPP access, to re-establish user-plane resources of the PDU session(s) or to deliver downlink signalling associated with 3GPP access over 3GPP access when the UE is in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode over non-3GPP access and:

1) in 5GMM-IDLE mode over 3GPP access when the UE is not in MICO mode; or

2) in 5GMM-IDLE mode with suspend indication over 3GPP access when the UE is not in MICO mode.

The network shall not use the NOTIFICATION message to re-establish user-plane resources of PDU session(s) associated with non-3GPP access over 3GPP access if all the PDU sessions of the UE that are established over the 3GPP access are associated with control plane only indication. .

The network shall not use the NOTIFICATION message over non-3GPP access, if:

a) the MUSIM UE supports the paging indication for voice services;

b) the network has indicated "paging indication for voice services supported" to the UE; and

c) the AMF detects that the downlink data is related to voice service (see 3GPPTS23.501[8]).

5.6.3.2 Notification procedure initiation

The network shall initiate the notification procedure by sending the NOTIFICATION message to the UE and start timer T3565 (see example in figure5.6.3.2.1).

For case a) in subclause5.6.3.1, the NOTIFICATION message is sent from the network to the UE via 3GPP access with access type indicating non-3GPP access.

For case b) in subclause5.6.3.1, the NOTIFICATION message is sent from the network to the UE via non-3GPP access with access type indicating 3GPP access when the UE is not in MICO mode.



Figure5.6.3.2.1: Notification procedure

Upon reception of a NOTIFICATION message, the UE shall stop the timer T3346, if running.

For case a) in subclause5.6.3.1, upon reception of NOTIFICATION message, the UE shall initiate a service request procedure over 3GPP access as specified in subclauses5.6.1.

NOTE: For a UE in NB-NI mode, if there is DL user data pending for a PDU session associated with non-3GPP access then the AMF notifies the SMF that reactivation of user plane resources cannot be performed if the number of PDU sessions that currently has user-plane resources established equals to the UE's maximum number of supported user-plane resources.

For case b) in subclause5.6.3.1, upon reception of NOTIFICATION message:

a) if control plane CIoT 5GS optimization is not used by the UE, the UE shall:

1) initiate a service request procedure over 3GPP access as specified in subclause5.6.1.2.1, if the UE is in 5GMM-REGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE or 5GMM-REGISTERED.NON-ALLOWED-SERVICE (as described in subclause5.3.5.2) state over 3GPP access or 5GMM-REGISTERED.NON-ALLOWED-SERVICE state (see subclause5.3.5.2), and the UE is in the 5GMM-IDLE mode without suspend indication;

2) initiate a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update over 3GPP access as specified in subclause5.5.1.3.2, if the UE is in 5GMM-REGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-REGISTRATION-UPDATE state over 3GPP access; or

3) proceed as specified in subclause5.3.1.5 if the UE is in the 5GMM-IDLE mode with suspend indication;

b) if control plane CIoT 5GS optimization is used by the UE, the UE shall:

1) initiate a service request procedure over 3GPP access as specified in subclause5.6.1.2.2, if the UE is in 5GMM-REGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE or 5GMM-REGISTERED.NON-ALLOWED-SERVICE (as described in subclause5.3.5.2) state and the UE is in the 5GMM-IDLE mode without suspend indication;

2) initiate a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update over 3GPP access as specified in subclause5.5.1.3.2, if the UE is in 5GMM-REGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-REGISTRATION-UPDATE state; or

3) proceed as specified in subclause5.3.1.5 if the UE is in the 5GMM-IDLE mode with suspend indication; or

c) if:

1) the UE is in 5GMM-REGISTERED.NO-CELL-AVAILABLE state, 5GMM-REGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH state, 5GMM-REGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE state or 5GMM-REGISTERED.UPDATE-NEEDED state over 3GPP access; or

2)  the MUSIM UE is not able to respond the NOTIFICATION message as specified in case a) and b) above, e.g., due to UE implementation constraints;

 the UE shall respond with NOTIFICATION RESPONSE message over non-3GPP access indicating inability of the UE to initiate a service request procedure or a registration procedure over 3GPP access and may include the PDU session status information element to indicate:

1) the single access PDU session(s) not in 5GSM state PDU SESSION INACTIVE in the UE associated with the 3GPP access type; and

2) the MA PDU session(s) not in 5GSM state PDU SESSION INACTIVE in the UE and having user plane resources established associated with the 3GPP access type.

Upon reception of NOTIFICATION message:

 For case b) in subclause5.6.3.1, if the UE is in 5GMM-REGISTERED.NO-CELL-AVAILABLE state or 5GMM-REGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH state and a local release was performed in the UE for the single access PDU sessions associated with the 3GPP access or for user plane resources on the 3GPP access of MA PDU sessions;

then the UE shall respond with NOTIFICATION RESPONSE message over non-3GPP access indicating with the PDU session status information element that:

- the local release of its single access PDU sessions associated with the 3GPP access was performed; and

- the local release of its 3GPP access user plane resources of MA PDU sessions was performed.

5.6.3.3 Notification procedure completion

Upon reception of SERVICE REQUEST message, CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message or REGISTRATION REQUEST message, the AMF shall stop timer T3565 and proceed service request procedure as specified in subclauses5.6.3.1 or registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update as specified in subclauses5.5.1.3. If no user-plane resources of PDU session(s) need to be re-established, the AMF should notify the SMF that the UE was reachable but did not accept to re-establish the user-plane resources of PDU session(s).

When the 5GMM entity in the AMF receives an indication from the lower layer that it has received the NGAP UE context resume request message as specified in 3GPPTS38.413[31], the AMF shall stop timer T3565.

Upon reception of NOTIFICATION RESPONSE message over non-3GPP access, the AMF shall stop timer T3565 and should notify the SMF that the UE is unreachable.

If the NOTIFICATION RESPONSE message includes the PDU session status information element, then:

a) for single access PDU sessions, the AMF shall:

1) perform a local release of all those PDU sessions which are not in 5GSM state PDU SESSION INACTIVE on the AMF side associated with 3GPP access, but are indicated by the UE in the PDU session status information element in the NOTIFICATION RESPONSE message as being in 5GSM state PDU SESSION INACTIVE; and

2) shall request the SMF to perform a local release of all those PDU sessions associated with 3GPP access; and

b) For MA PDU sessions, the AMF shall:

1) for MA PDU sessions having user plane resources established only on the 3GPP access in the AMF side, but are indicated by the UE in the PDU session status information element in the NOTIFICATION RESPONSE message as no user plane resources established on the 3GPP access:

i) perform a local release of all those MA PDU sessions; and

ii) request the SMF to perform a local release of all those MA PDU sessions; and

2) for MA PDU sessions having user plane resources established on both accesses in the AMF side, but are indicated by the UE in the PDU session status information element in the NOTIFICATION RESPONSE message as no user plane resources established on the 3GPP access:

i) perform a local release of 3GPP access user plane resources of all those MA PDU sessions; and

ii) request the SMF to perform a local release of 3GPP access user plane resources of all those MA PDU sessions.

5.6.3.4 Abnormal cases on the network side

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a) Expiry of timer T3565.

 The network shall, on the first expiry of the timer T3565, retransmit the NOTIFICATION message and shall reset and start timer T3565. This retransmission is repeated four times, i.e. on the fifth expiry of timer T3565, the procedure shall be aborted. In addition, upon the fifth expiry of timer T3565:

 For case a) in subclause5.6.3.1, the AMF should notify the SMF that the UE is unreachable. The AMF may enter 5GMM-IDLE mode over 3GPP access.

 For case b) in subclause5.6.3.1, the AMF may either:

1) perform the paging procedure over the 3GPP access; or

2) notify the SMF that the UE is unreachable.

NOTE: Whether the AMF performs the paging procedure or notifies the SMF is up to operator's policies.

b) De-registration procedure collision

 If the network receives a DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message before it receives a SERVICE REQUEST message or REGISTRATION REQUEST message, the AMF shall stop timer T3565 and proceed de-registration procedure as specified in subclause5.5.2.

5.6.3.5 Abnormal cases on the UE side

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a) NOTIFICATION message received via non-3GPP access with access type indicating 3GPP access when UE-initiated 5GMM specific procedure or service request procedure over 3GPP access is ongoing.

 The UE shall proceed with 5GMM specific procedure or service request procedure. If for these procedures lower layers indicate that the access attempt is barred, then the UE shall handle the pending NOTIFICATION message as specified in subclause 5.6.3.2. Otherwise, the UE shall ignore the NOTIFICATION message once lower layers confirms the establishment of the signalling connection.

6 Elementary procedures for 5GS session management

6.1 Overview

6.1.1 General

This clause describes the procedures used for 5GS session management (5GSM) performed over an N1 NAS signalling connection.

The main function of the 5GSM sublayer is to support the PDU session handling in the UE and in the SMF (transferred via the AMF).

The 5GSM comprises procedures for:

- the authentication and authorization, establishment, modification and release of PDU sessions; and

- request for performing handover of an existing PDU session between 3GPP access and non-3GPP access, or to transfer an existing PDN connection in the EPS to the 5GS.

Each PDU session represents a PDU session established between the UE and an SMF. PDU sessions can remain established even if the radio and network resources constituting the corresponding PDU session between the UE and the SMF are temporarily released.

5GSM procedures can be performed only if a 5GMM context has been established between the UE and the AMF, and the secure exchange of NAS messages has been initiated by the AMF by use of the 5GMM procedures described in clause5. Once the UE is successfully registered to a PLMN, a PDU session can be established. If no 5GMM context has been established, the 5GMM sublayer has to initiate the establishment of a 5GMM context by use of the 5GMM procedures as described in clause5.

The UE can request the network to modify or release PDU sessions. The network can fulfil such a request from the UE by modifying a PDU session or releasing a PDU session using network-requested procedures (see subclause6.3).

6.1.2 Types of 5GSM procedures

Three types of 5GSM procedures can be distinguished:

a) Procedures related to PDU sessions:

 These procedures are initiated by the network and are used for authentication and authorization or manipulation of PDU sessions:

1) PDU authentication and authorization;

2) network-requested PDU session modification; and

3) network-requested PDU session release.

 This procedure is initiated by the UE and to request for establishment of PDU sessions or to perform handover of an existing PDU session between 3GPP access and non-3GPP access, or to transfer an existing PDN connection in the EPS to the 5GS:

 UE-requested PDU session establishment.

b) Transaction related procedures:

 These procedures are initiated by the UE to request for handling of PDU sessions, i.e. to modify a PDU session, or to release a PDU session:

1) UE-requested PDU session modification; and

2) UE-requested PDU session release.

 This procedure is initiated by the 5G ProSe UE-to-network relay UE and is used for the manipulation of PDU sessions:

- remote UE report.

A successful transaction related procedure initiated by the UE triggers the network to execute one of the following procedures related to PDU session; network-requested PDU session modification procedure or network-requested PDU session release procedure. The UE treats the start of the procedure related to the PDU session as completion of the transaction related procedure.

c) Common procedure:

 The following 5GSM procedure can be related to a PDU session or to a procedure transaction:

 5GSM status procedure.

6.1.3 5GSM sublayer states

6.1.3.1 General

In the following subclauses, the possible states of a PDU session in the UE and the network side are described.

6.1.3.2 5GSM sublayer states in the UE

6.1.3.2.1 Overview

In the following subclauses, the possible 5GSM sublayer states of the UE are described and shown in figure6.1.3.2.1.1.





NOTE1: Not all possible transitions are shown in this figure.

NOTE2: Some transitions shown in this figure are not applicable to the MA PDU session.

Figure6.1.3.2.1.1: The 5GSM sublayer states for PDU session handling in the UE (overview)

6.1.3.2.2 PDU SESSION INACTIVE

No PDU session exists.

6.1.3.2.3 PDU SESSION ACTIVE PENDING

The UE has initiated a PDU session establishment procedure towards the network and is waiting for a response from the network.

6.1.3.2.4 PDU SESSION ACTIVE

The PDU session is active in the UE.

6.1.3.2.5 PDU SESSION INACTIVE PENDING

The UE has initiated a PDU session release procedure towards the network and is waiting for a response from the network.

6.1.3.2.6 PDU SESSION MODIFICATION PENDING

The UE has initiated a PDU session modification procedure towards the network and is waiting for a response from the network.

6.1.3.2.7 PROCEDURE TRANSACTION INACTIVE

No procedure transaction exists.

6.1.3.2.8 PROCEDURE TRANSACTION PENDING

The UE has initiated a procedure transaction towards the network.



Figure6.1.3.2.8.1: The procedure transaction states in the UE (overview)

6.1.3.3 5GSM sublayer states in the network side

6.1.3.3.1 Overview

In the following subclauses, the possible 5GSM sublayer states of the network are described and shown in Figure6.1.3.3.1.1.



NOTE1: Not all possible transitions are shown in this figure.

NOTE2: Some transitions shown in this figure are not applicable to the MA PDU session.

Figure6.1.3.3.1.1: The 5GSM sublayer states for PDU session handling in the network (overview)

6.1.3.3.2 PDU SESSION INACTIVE

No PDU session exists.

6.1.3.3.3 PDU SESSION ACTIVE

The PDU session is active in the network.

6.1.3.3.4 PDU SESSION INACTIVE PENDING

The network has initiated a PDU session release procedure towards the UE and is waiting for a response from the UE.

6.1.3.3.5 PDU SESSION MODIFICATION PENDING

The network has initiated a PDU session modification procedure towards the UE and is waiting for a response from the UE.

6.1.3.3.6 PROCEDURE TRANSACTION INACTIVE

No procedure transaction exists.

6.1.3.3.7 PROCEDURE TRANSACTION PENDING

The network has initiated a procedure transaction towards the UE.



Figure6.1.3.3.7.1: The procedure transaction states in the network (overview)

6.1.4 Coordination between 5GSM and ESM

6.1.4.1 Coordination between 5GSM and ESM with N26 interface

Interworking with EPS is supported for a PDU session, if the PDU session includes the mapped EPS bearer context(s) or has association(s) between QoS flow and mapped EPS bearer after inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode. The SMF shall not include any mapped EPS bearer contexts associated with a PDU session for LADN and with a PDU session which is a multi-homed IPv6 PDU session. See coding of the Mapped EPS bearer contexts IE in subclause9.11.4.8. In an MA PDU session, the UE shall have one set of the mapped EPS bearer contexts. The network can provide the set of the mapped EPS bearer contexts of the MA PDU session via either access of the MA PDU session. In an MA PDU session, the UE shall support modification or deletion via an access of a mapped EPS bearer context of the MA PDU session created via the same or the other access.

Upon inter-system change from N1 mode to S1 mode, the UE shall create the default EPS bearer context and the dedicated EPS bearer context(s) based on the parameters of the mapped EPS bearer contexts or the associations between QoS flow and mapped EPS bearer in the PDU session, if available. The EPS bearer identity assigned for the QoS flow of the default QoS rule becomes the EPS bearer identity of the default bearer in the corresponding PDN connection. If there is no EPS bearer identity assigned to the QoS flow of the default QoS rule of a PDU session associated with 3GPP access, or if there is no corresponding mapped EPS bearer contexts associated with the EPS bearer identity assigned to the QoS flow of the default QoS rule of a PDU session associated with 3GPP access:

a) the PDU session is not an MA PDU session established over both 3GPP access and non-3GPP access, the UE shall perform a local release of the PDU session; or

b) the PDU session is an MA PDU session established over both 3GPP access and non-3GPP access, the UE shall perform a local release of the PDU session over 3GPP access and consider that the MA PDU session is established over non-3GPP access only.

If there is no EPS bearer identity assigned to the QoS flow(s) of a PDU session associated with 3GPP access which is not associated with the default QoS rule, or if there is no corresponding mapped EPS bearer contexts associated with the EPS bearer identity assigned to the QoS flow of the non-default QoS rule of a PDU session associated with 3GPP access, unless the PDU session is an MA PDU session established over 3GPP access and over non-3GPP access, the UE shall locally delete the QoS rules and the QoS flow description(s). The UE uses the parameters from each PDU session for which interworking with EPS is supported to create corresponding default EPS bearer context and optionally dedicated EPS bearer context(s) as follows:

a) the PDU session type of the PDU session shall be mapped to the PDN type of the default EPS bearer context as follows:

1) the PDN type shall be set to "non-IP" if the PDU session type is "Unstructured";

2) the PDN type shall be set to "IPv4" if the PDU session type is "IPv4";

3) the PDN type shall be set to "IPv6" if the PDU session type is "IPv6";

4) the PDN type shall be set to "IPv4v6" if the PDU session type is "IPv4v6";

5) the PDN type shall be set to "non-IP" if the PDU session type is "Ethernet", and the UE, the network or both of them do not support Ethernet PDN type in S1 mode; and

6) the PDN type shall be set to "Ethernet" if the PDU session type is "Ethernet" and the UE and the network support Ethernet PDN type in S1 mode;

b) the PDU address of the PDU session shall be mapped to the PDN address of the default EPS bearer context as follows:

1) the PDN address of the default EPS bearer context is set to the PDU address of the PDU session, if the PDU session type is "IPv4", "IPv6" or "IPv4v6"; and

2) the PDN address of the default EPS bearer context is set to zero, if the PDU session type is "Ethernet" or "Unstructured";

c) the DNN of the PDU session shall be mapped to the APN of the default EPS bearer context, unless the PDU session is an emergency PDU session;

d) the APN-AMBR and extended APN-AMBR received in the parameters of the default EPS bearer context of the mapped EPS bearer contexts shall be mapped to the APN-AMBR and extended APN-AMBR of the default EPS bearer context;

e) for each PDU session in state PDU SESSION ACTIVE, PDU SESSION MODIFICATION PENDING or PDU SESSION INACTIVE PENDING:

1) if the UE is performing an inter-system change from N1 mode to WB-S1 mode, the UE shall set the state of the mapped EPS bearer context(s) to BEARER CONTEXT ACTIVE; or

2) if the UE is performing an inter-system change from N1 mode to NB-S1 mode, for the mapped EPS bearer context corresponding to the default EPS bearer, the UE shall set the state of the mapped EPS bearer context to BEARER CONTEXT ACTIVE. Additionally, if the UE is performing an inter-system change from WB-N1 mode to NB-S1 mode, for the mapped EPS bearer context corresponding to a dedicated EPS bearer, if any, the UE shall set the state of the mapped EPS bearer context to BEARER CONTEXT INACTIVE; and

f) for any other PDU session the UE shall set the state of the mapped EPS bearer context(s) to BEARER CONTEXT INACTIVE.

Additionally, for each mapped EPS bearer context or the association between QoS flow and mapped EPS bearer in the PDU session:

a) the EPS bearer identity shall be set to the EPS bearer identity received in the mapped EPS bearer context, or the EPS bearer identity associated with the QoS flow;

b) the EPS QoS parameters shall be set to the mapped EPS QoS parameters of the EPS bearer received in the mapped EPS bearer context, or the EPS QoS parameters associated with the QoS flow;

c) the extended EPS QoS parameters shall be set to the mapped extended EPS QoS parameters of the EPS bearer received in the mapped EPS bearer context, or the extended EPS QoS parameters associated with the QoS flow; and

d) the traffic flow template shall be set to the mapped traffic flow template of the EPS bearer received in the mapped EPS bearer context, or the stored traffic flow template associated with the QoS flow, if available.

After inter-system change from N1 mode to S1 mode, the UE shall associate the PDU session identity, the S-NSSAI, and the session-AMBR with the default EPS bearer context, and for each EPS bearer context mapped from one or more QoS flows, associate the QoS rule(s) for the QoS flow(s) and the QoS flow description(s) for the QoS flow(s) with the EPS bearer context.

If the PDU session is associated with the control plane only indication and supports interworking with EPS, after inter-system change from N1 mode to S1 mode, the UE shall associate the EPS bearer context(s) of the PDN connection corresponding to the PDU session with the control plane only indication.

If the PDU session is associated with a PDU session pair ID, after inter-system change from N1 mode to S1 mode, the UE shall associate the default EPS bearer context of the PDN connection corresponding to the PDU session with the PDU session pair ID. If the PDU session is associated with an RSN, after inter-system change from N1 mode to S1 mode, the UE shall associate the default EPS bearer context of the PDN connection corresponding to the PDU session with the RSN.

After inter-system change from N1 mode to S1 mode, the UE and the SMF shall maintain the PDU session type of the PDU session until the PDN connection corresponding to the PDU session is released if the UE supports non-IP PDN type and the PDU session type is "Ethernet" or "Unstructured".

After inter-system change from N1 mode to S1 mode, the UE and the SMF shall maintain the following 5GSM attributions and capabilities associated with the PDU session until the PDN connection corresponding to the PDU session is released:

a) the always-on PDU session indication;

b) the maximum number of supported packet filters;

c) the support of reflective QoS;

d) the maximum data rate per UE for user-plane integrity protection supported by the UE for uplink and the maximum data rate per UE for user-plane integrity protection supported by the UE for downlink;

e) the support of multi-homed IPv6 PDU session; and

f) if the PDU session is an MA PDU session established over 3GPP access, the PDN connection of the default EPS bearer corresponding to the MA PDU session shall be considered as a user-plane resource of the MA PDU session.

After inter-system change from N1 mode to S1 mode, the UE operating in single-registration mode in a network supporting N26 interface shall deem that the following features are supported by the network on the PDN connection corresponding to the PDU session:

a) PS data off; and

b) Local address in TFT.

If there is a QoS flow used for IMS signalling, after inter-system change from N1 mode to S1 mode, the EPS bearer associated with the QoS flow for IMS signalling becomes the EPS bearer for IMS signalling.

When the UE is provided with a new session-AMBR in the Protocol configuration options IE or Extended protocol configuration options IE in the MODIFY EPS BEARER CONTEXT REQUEST message, the UE shall discard the corresponding association(s) and associate the new value(s) with the EPS bearer context.

The network may provide the UE with one or more QoS rules by including either one QoS rules parameter, or one QoS rules with the length of two octets parameter, but not both, in the Protocol configuration options IE or Extended protocol configuration options IE in the MODIFY EPS BEARER CONTEXT REQUEST message. The network may provide the UE with one or more QoS flow descriptions corresponding to the EPS bearer context being modified, by including either one QoS flow descriptions parameter, or one QoS flow descriptions with the length of two octets parameter, but not both, in the Protocol configuration options IE or Extended protocol configuration options IE in the MODIFY EPS BEARER CONTEXT REQUEST message.

When the UE is provided with one or more QoS flow descriptions or the EPS bearer identity of an existing QoS flow description is modified in the Protocol configuration options IE or Extended protocol configuration options IE in the MODIFY EPS BEARER CONTEXT REQUEST message, the UE shall check the EPS bearer identity included in the QoS flow description; and:

a) if the EPS bearer identity corresponds to the EPS bearer context being modified or the EPS bearer identity is not included, the UE shall store the QoS flow description and all the associated QoS rules, if any, for the EPS bearer context being modified for use during inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode; and

b) otherwise the UE shall locally delete the QoS flow description and all the associated QoS rules, if any, and include a Protocol configuration options IE or Extended protocol configuration options IE with a 5GSM cause parameter set to 5GSM cause #84 "syntactical error in the QoS operation" in the MODIFY EPS BEARER CONTEXT ACCEPT message.

When the UE is provided with one or more QoS rules, or one or more QoS flow descriptions in the Protocol configuration options IE or Extended protocol configuration options IE in the MODIFY EPS BEARER CONTEXT REQUEST message, the UE shall process the QoS rules sequentially starting with the first QoS rule and shall process the QoS flow descriptions sequentially starting with the first QoS flow description. The UE shall check the QoS rules and QoS flow descriptions for different types of errors as follows:

NOTE1: If an error is detected in a QoS rule or a QoS flow description which requires sending a Protocol configuration options IE or Extended protocol configuration options IE with a 5GSM cause value, then the QoS rules parameter, the QoS rules with the length of two octets parameter, the QoS flow descriptions parameter and the QoS flow descriptions with the length of two octets parameter included in the Protocol configuration options IE or Extended protocol configuration options IE in the MODIFY EPS BEARER CONTEXT REQUEST message are discarded, if any.

NOTE2: If the EPS bearer context modification procedure is rejected, then the QoS rules parameter, the QoS rules with the length of two octets parameter, the QoS flow descriptions parameter and the QoS flow descriptions with the length of two octets parameter included in the Protocol configuration options IE or Extended protocol configuration options IE in the MODIFY EPS BEARER CONTEXT REQUEST message are discarded, if any.

a) Semantic errors in QoS operations:

1) When the rule operation is "Modify existing QoS rule and add packet filters", "Modify existing QoS rule and replace all packet filters", "Modify existing QoS rule and delete packet filters" or "Modify existing QoS rule without modifying packet filters" on the default QoS rule and the DQR bit is set to "the QoS rule is not the default QoS rule".

2) When the rule operation is "Modify existing QoS rule and add packet filters", "Modify existing QoS rule and replace all packet filters", "Modify existing QoS rule and delete packet filters" or "Modify existing QoS rule without modifying packet filters" on a QoS rule which is not the default QoS rule and the DQR bit is set to "the QoS rule is the default QoS rule".

3) When the rule operation is "Create new QoS rule" and the DQR bit is set to "the QoS rule is the default QoS rule" when there's already a default QoS rule with different QoS rule identifier.

4) When the rule operation is "Delete existing QoS rule" on the default QoS rule.

5) When the rule operation is "Create new QoS rule", "Modify existing QoS rule and add packet filters", "Modify existing QoS rule and replace all packet filters", "Modify existing QoS rule and delete packet filters", or "Modify existing QoS rule without modifying packet filters" and two or more QoS rules associated with this PDU session would have identical precedence values.

6) When the rule operation is "Modify existing QoS rule and delete packet filters", the QoS rule is a QoS rule of a PDU session of IPv4, IPv6, IPv4v6 or Ethernet PDU session type, and the packet filter list in the resultant QoS rule is empty.

7) When the rule operation is "Create new QoS rule", and there is already an existing QoS rule with the same QoS rule identifier and the existing QoS rule is associated with a QoS flow description stored for the EPS bearer context being modified or the existing QoS rule is not associated with any QoS flow description.

8) When the rule operation is "Modify existing QoS rule and add packet filters", "Modify existing QoS rule and replace all packet filters", "Modify existing QoS rule and delete packet filters", or "Modify existing QoS rule without modifying packet filters" and there is no existing QoS rule with the same QoS rule identifier associated with a QoS flow description stored for the EPS bearer context being modified.

9) When the rule operation is "Delete existing QoS rule" and there is no existing QoS rule with the same QoS rule identifier associated with a QoS flow description stored for the EPS bearer context being modified.

10) When the flow description operation is "Create new QoS flow description" and there is already an existing QoS flow description with the same QoS flow identifier stored for the EPS bearer context being modified.

11) When the flow description operation is "Modify existing QoS flow description" and there is no existing QoS flow description with the same QoS flow identifier stored for the EPS bearer context being modified.

12) When the flow description operation is "Delete existing QoS flow description" and there is no existing QoS flow description with the same QoS flow identifier stored for the EPS bearer context being modified.

13) When the UE determines that:

i) the default EPS bearer context is associated with one or more QoS flows but the default EPS bearer context is not associated with the default QoS rule.

ii) a dedicated EPS bearer context is associated with one or more QoS flows but the dedicated EPS bearer context is associated with the default QoS rule.

14) When the rule operation is "Create new QoS rule" and there is already an existing QoS rule with the same QoS rule identifier associated with a QoS flow description stored for an EPS bearer context different from the EPS bearer context being modified and belonging to the same PDN connection as the EPS bearer context being modified.

15) When the flow description operation is "Create new QoS flow description", and there is already an existing QoS flow description with the same QoS flow identifier stored for an EPS bearer context different from the EPS bearer context being modified and belonging to the same PDN connection as the EPS bearer context being modified.

16) When the rule operation is "Create new QoS rule", "Modify existing QoS rule and add packet filters", "Modify existing QoS rule and replace all packet filters", "Modify existing QoS rule and delete packet filters", or "Modify existing QoS rule without modifying packet filters" and the resultant QoS rule is associated with a QoS flow description stored for an EPS bearer context different from the EPS bearer context being modified.

17) When the rule operation is "Create new QoS rule", the DQR bit is set to "the QoS rule is not the default QoS rule", the QoS rule is provided for a PDN connection of PDN type "non-IP" and there is locally available information associated with the PDN connection that is set to "Unstructured".

18) When the flow description operation is "Create new QoS flow description" or "Modify existing QoS flow description", the QFI associated with the QoS flow description is not the same as the QFI of the default QoS rule, the QoS flow description is provided for a PDN connection of PDN type "non-IP" and there is locally available information associated with the PDN connection that is set to "Unstructured".

In case 5, if the old QoS rule (i.e. the QoS rule that existed before the MODIFY EPS BEARER CONTEXT REQUEST message was received) is not the default QoS rule and the old QoS rule is associated with a QoS flow description stored for the EPS bearer context being modified, the UE shall not diagnose an error, shall further process the new request and, if it was processed successfully, shall delete the old QoS rule which has identical precedence value. Otherwise, the UE shall include a Protocol configuration options IE or Extended protocol configuration options IE with a 5GSM cause parameter set to 5GSM cause #83 "semantic error in the QoS operation" in the MODIFY EPS BEARER CONTEXT ACCEPT message.

 In case 6, if the QoS rule is not the default QoS rule, the UE shall delete the QoS rule. If the QoS rule is the default QoS rule, the UE shall include a Protocol configuration options IE or Extended protocol configuration options IE with a 5GSM cause parameter set to 5GSM cause #83 "semantic error in the QoS operation" in the MODIFY EPS BEARER CONTEXT ACCEPT message.

 In case 7, if the existing QoS rule is not the default QoS rule and the DQR bit of the new QoS rule is set to "the QoS rule is not the default QoS rule", the UE shall not diagnose an error, further process the create request and, if it was processed successfully, delete the old QoS rule (i.e. the QoS rule that existed before the MODIFY EPS BEARER CONTEXT REQUEST message was received). If the existing QoS rule is the default QoS rule or the DQR bit of the new QoS rule is set to "the QoS rule is the default QoS rule", the UE shall include a Protocol configuration options IE or Extended protocol configuration options IE with a 5GSM cause parameter set to 5GSM cause #83 "semantic error in the QoS operation" in the MODIFY EPS BEARER CONTEXT ACCEPT message.

 In case 9, the UE shall not diagnose an error, further process the delete request and, if it was processed successfully, consider the respective QoS rule as successfully deleted.

 In case 10, the UE shall not diagnose an error, further process the create request and, if it was processed successfully, delete the old QoS flow description (i.e. the QoS flow description that existed before the MODIFY EPS BEARER CONTEXT REQUEST message was received).

 In case 12, the UE shall not diagnose an error, further process the delete request and, if it was processed successfully, consider the respective QoS flow description as successfully deleted.

 Otherwise, the UE shall include a Protocol configuration options IE or Extended protocol configuration options IE with a 5GSM cause parameter set to 5GSM cause #83 "semantic error in the QoS operation" in the MODIFY EPS BEARER CONTEXT ACCEPT message.

b) Syntactical errors in QoS operations:

1) When the rule operation is "Create new QoS rule", "Modify existing QoS rule and add packet filters", "Modify existing QoS rule and replace all packet filters" or "Modify existing QoS rule and delete packet filters", the packet filter list in the QoS rule is empty, and the QoS rule is provided for a PDN connection of PDN type IPv4, IPv6, IPv4v6 or Ethernet, or for a PDN connection of PDN type "non-IP" and there is locally available information associated with the PDN connection that is set to "Ethernet".

2) When the rule operation is "Delete existing QoS rule" or "Modify existing QoS rule without modifying packet filters" with a non-empty packet filter list in the QoS rule.

3) When the rule operation is "Modify existing QoS rule and delete packet filters" and the packet filter to be deleted does not exist in the original QoS rule.

4) Void.

5) When there are other types of syntactical errors in the coding of the QoS rules parameter, the QoS rules with the length of two octets parameter, the QoS flow descriptions parameter or the QoS flow descriptions with the length of two octets parameter, such as a mismatch between the number of packet filters subfield, and the number of packet filters in the packet filter list when the rule operation is "delete existing QoS rule" or "create new QoS rule", or the number of packet filters subfield is larger than the maximum possible number of packet filters in the packet filter list (i.e., there is no QoS rule precedence subfield included in the QoS rule IE), the QoS Rule Identifier is set to "no QoS rule identifier assigned", or the QoS flow identifier is set to "no QoS flow identifier assigned".

6) When, the

A) rule operation is "Create new QoS rule", "Modify existing QoS rule and add packet filters", "Modify existing QoS rule and replace all packet filters", "Modify existing QoS rule and delete packet filters" or "Modify existing QoS rule without modifying packet filters", the UE determines, by using the QoS rules QFI as the 5QI, that there is a resulting QoS rule for a GBR QoS flow (as described in 3GPPTS23.501[8] table5.7.4-1), and there is no QoS flow description with a QFI corresponding to the QFI of the resulting QoS rule.

B) flow description operation is "Delete existing QoS flow description", and the UE determines, by using the QoS rules QFI as the 5QI, that there is a resulting QoS rule for a GBR QoS flow (as described in 3GPPTS23.501[8] table5.7.4-1) with a QFI corresponding to the QFI of the QoS flow description that is deleted (i.e. there is no associated QoS flow description with the same QFI).

7) When the flow description operation is "Create new QoS flow description" or "Modify existing QoS flow description", and the UE determines that there is a QoS flow description of a GBR QoS flow (as described in 3GPPTS23.501[8] table5.7.4-1) which lacks at least one of the mandatory parameters (i.e., GFBR uplink, GFBR downlink, MFBR uplink and MFBR downlink). If the QoS flow description does not include a 5QI, the UE determines this by using the QFI as the 5QI.

 In case 3 the UE shall not diagnose an error, further process the deletion request and, if no error according to items c and d was detected, consider the respective packet filter as successfully deleted.

 Otherwise the UE shall include a Protocol configuration options IE or Extended protocol configuration options IE with a 5GSM cause parameter set to 5GSM cause #84 "syntactical error in the QoS operation" in the MODIFY EPS BEARER CONTEXT ACCEPT message.

NOTE3: It is not considered an error if the UE determines that after processing all QoS operations on QoS rules and QoS flow descriptions there is a QoS flow description that is not associated with any QoS rule and the UE is not in NB-N1 mode.

c) Semantic errors in packet filters:

1) When a packet filter consists of conflicting packet filter components which would render the packet filter ineffective, i.e. no IP packet will ever fit this packet filter. How the UE determines a semantic error in a packet filter is outside the scope of the present document.

 The UE shall include a Protocol configuration options IE or Extended protocol configuration options IE with a 5GSM cause parameter set to 5GSM cause #44 "semantic errors in packet filter(s)" in the MODIFY EPS BEARER CONTEXT ACCEPT message.

d) Syntactical errors in packet filters:

1) When the rule operation is "Modify existing QoS rule and add packet filters" or "Modify existing QoS rule and replace all packet filters", and two or more packet filters in the resultant QoS rule would have identical packet filter identifiers.

2) When the rule operation is "Create new QoS rule", and two or more packet filters in the resultant QoS rule would have identical packet filter identifiers.

3) When there are other types of syntactical errors in the coding of packet filters, such as the use of a reserved value for a packet filter component identifier.

4) When the rule operation is "Create new QoS rule", "Modify existing QoS rule and add packet filters" or "Modify existing QoS rule and replace all packet filters" with a non-empty packet filter list in the QoS rule, and the DQR bit is set to "the QoS rule is the default QoS rule", the QoS rule is provided for a PDN connection of PDN type "non-IP" and there is locally available information associated with the PDN connection that is set to "Unstructured".

 In case 1, if two or more packet filters with identical packet filter identifiers are contained in the MODIFY EPS BEARER CONTEXT REQUEST message, the UE shall include a Protocol configuration options IE or Extended protocol configuration options IE with a 5GSM cause parameter set to 5GSM cause #45 "syntactical error in packet filter(s)" in the MODIFY EPS BEARER CONTEXT ACCEPT message. Otherwise, the UE shall not diagnose an error, further process the MODIFY EPS BEARER CONTEXT REQUEST message and, if it was processed successfully, delete the old packet filters which have the identical packet filter identifiers.

 Otherwise the UE shall include a Protocol configuration options IE or Extended protocol configuration options IE with a 5GSM cause parameter set to 5GSM cause #45 "syntactical error in packet filter(s)" in the MODIFY EPS BEARER CONTEXT ACCEPT message.

If the UE detects different errors in the QoS rules and QoS flow descriptions as described in this subclause which requires sending a 5GSM cause parameter in the MODIFY EPS BEARER CONTEXT ACCEPT message, the UE shall include a single 5GSM cause parameter in the MODIFY EPS BEARER CONTEXT ACCEPT message.

NOTE4: The 5GSM cause to use cannot be different from #44 "semantic error in packet filter(s)", #45 "syntactical errors in packet filter(s)", #83 "semantic error in the QoS operation" or #84 "syntactical error in the QoS operation". The selection of a 5GSM cause is up to UE implementation.

Upon successful completion of an EPS attach procedure or tracking area updating procedure after inter-system change from N1 mode to S1 mode (see 3GPPTS24.301[15]), unless the PDU session is an MA PDU session established over 3GPP access and over non-3GPP access,

a) the UE shall delete any UE derived QoS rules of each PDU session which has been transferred to EPS;

b) the UE and the SMF shall perform a local release of the PDU session(s) associated with 3GPP access which have not been transferred to EPS; and

c) the UE and the SMF shall perform a local release of QoS flow(s) which have not been transferred to EPS, of the PDU session(s) which have been transferred to EPS. The UE and the SMF shall also perform a local release of any QoS flow description not associated with any QoS rule and not associated with any mapped EPS bearer context. If there is a QoS flow description not associated with any QoS rule, but associated with a mapped EPS bearer context, and after the inter-system change from N1 mode to S1 mode the respective EPS bearer context is active, then the UE shall associate the QoS flow description with the EPS bearer context.

For PDU session(s) associated with non-3GPP access in 5GS, if present, the UE may:

a) keep some or all of these PDU sessions still associated with non-3GPP access in 5GS, if supported;

b) release some or all of these PDU sessions explicitly by initiating the UE requested PDU session release procedure(s); or

c) attempt to transfer some or all of these PDU sessions from N1 mode to S1 mode by initiating the UE requested PDN connectivity procedure(s) with the PDN CONNECTIVITY REQUEST message created as follows:

1) if the PDU session is an emergency PDU session, the request type shall be set to "handover of emergency bearer services". Otherwise the request type shall be set to "handover";

2) the PDU session type of the PDU session shall be mapped to the PDN type of the default EPS bearer context as follows:

i) the PDN type shall be set to "non-IP" if the PDU session type is "Unstructured";

ii) the PDN type shall be set to "IPv4" if the PDU session type is "IPv4";

iii) the PDN type shall be set to "IPv6" if the PDU session type is "IPv6";

iv) the PDN type shall be set to "IPv4v6" if the PDU session type is "IPv4v6";

v) the PDN type shall be set to "non-IP" if the PDU session type is "Ethernet" and the UE, the network or both of them do not support Ethernet PDN type in S1 mode; and

vi) the PDN type shall be set to "Ethernet" if the PDU session type is "Ethernet" and the UE and the network support Ethernet PDN type in S1 mode;

3) the DNN of the PDU session shall be mapped to the APN of the default EPS bearer context, unless the PDN connection is an emergency PDN connection; and

4) the PDU session ID parameter in the Protocol configuration options IE or the Extended protocol configuration options IE shall be set to the PDU session identity of the PDU session.

 If a PDU session associated with non-3GPP access is transferred to EPS, the UE shall associate the PDU session identity with the default EPS bearer context and shall delete any UE derived QoS rules of such PDU session.

Interworking to 5GS is supported for a PDN connection, if the corresponding default EPS bearer context includes a PDU session identity, an S-NSSAI, if the PDN connection is a non-emergency PDN connection, session AMBR and one or more QoS flow descriptions received in the Protocol configuration options IE or Extended protocol configuration options IE (see 3GPPTS24.301[15]), or the default EPS bearer context has association with the PDU session identity, the S-NSSAI, if the PDU session is a non-emergency PDU session, the session-AMBR and one or more QoS flow descriptions after inter-system change from N1 mode to S1 mode.

For a PDN connection established in S1 mode, to enable the UE to attempt to transfer the PDN connection from S1 mode to N1 mode in case of inter-system change, the UE shall allocate a PDU session identity, indicate the allocated PDU session identity in the PDU session ID parameter in the Protocol configuration options IE of the PDN CONNECTIVITY REQUEST message and associate the allocated PDU session identity with the default EPS bearer context of the PDN connection. If an N5CW device supports 3GPP access and establishes a new PDN connection in S1 mode, the N5CW device shall refrain from allocating "PDU session identity value 15".

For a PDN connection established in S1 mode, the SMF assigning the QoS rules shall consider that the UE supports 16 packet filters for the corresponding PDU session until the UE indicates a higher number (as specified in subclause6.4.2.2).

The network may provide the UE with one or more QoS rules by including either one QoS rules parameter, or one QoS rules with the length of two octets parameter, but not both, in the Protocol configuration options IE or Extended protocol configuration options IE in the ACTIVATE DEFAULT EPS BEARER CONTEXT REQUEST or ACTIVATE DEDICATED EPS BEARER CONTEXT REQUEST message. The network may provide the UE with one or more QoS flow descriptions corresponding to the EPS bearer context being activated, by including either one QoS flow descriptions parameter, or one QoS flow descriptions with the length of two octets parameter, but not both, in the Protocol configuration options IE or Extended protocol configuration options IE in the ACTIVATE DEFAULT EPS BEARER CONTEXT REQUEST or ACTIVATE DEDICATED EPS BEARER CONTEXT REQUEST message.

When the UE is provided with one or more QoS flow descriptions in the Protocol configuration options IE or Extended protocol configuration options IE of the ACTIVATE DEFAULT EPS BEARER CONTEXT REQUEST or ACTIVATE DEDICATED EPS BEARER CONTEXT REQUEST message, the UE shall check the EPS bearer identity included in the QoS flow description; and:

a) if the EPS bearer identity corresponds to the EPS bearer context being activated or the EPS bearer identity is not included, the UE shall store the QoS flow description and all the associated QoS rules, if any, for the EPS bearer context being activated for use during inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode; and

b) otherwise the UE shall locally delete the QoS flow description and all the associated QoS rules, if any, and include a Protocol configuration options IE or Extended protocol configuration options IE with a 5GSM cause parameter set to 5GSM cause #84 "syntactical error in the QoS operation" in the ACTIVATE DEFAULT EPS BEARER CONTEXT ACCEPT or ACTIVATE DEDICATED EPS BEARER CONTEXT ACCEPT message.

When the UE is provided with one or more QoS rules, or one or more QoS flow descriptions in the Protocol configuration options IE or Extended protocol configuration options IE of the ACTIVATE DEFAULT EPS BEARER CONTEXT REQUEST or ACTIVATE DEDICATED EPS BEARER CONTEXT REQUEST message, the UE shall process the QoS rules sequentially starting with the first QoS rule and shall process the QoS flow descriptions sequentially starting with the first QoS flow description. The UE shall check QoS rules and QoS flow descriptions for different types of errors as follows:

NOTE5: If an error is detected in a QoS rule or a QoS flow description which requires sending a Protocol configuration options IE or Extended protocol configuration options IE with a 5GSM cause value, then the QoS rules parameter, the QoS rules with the length of two octets parameter, the QoS flow descriptions parameter and the QoS flow descriptions with the length of two octets parameter included in the Protocol configuration options IE or Extended protocol configuration options IE in the ACTIVATE DEFAULT EPS BEARER CONTEXT REQUEST or ACTIVATE DEDICATED EPS BEARER CONTEXT REQUEST message are discarded, if any.

NOTE6: If the default EPS bearer context activation procedure or the dedicated EPS bearer context activation procedure is rejected, then the QoS rules parameter, the QoS rules with the length of two octets parameter, the QoS flow descriptions parameter and the QoS flow descriptions with the length of two octets parameter included in the Protocol configuration options IE or Extended protocol configuration options IE in the ACTIVATE DEFAULT EPS BEARER CONTEXT REQUEST or ACTIVATE DEDICATED EPS BEARER CONTEXT REQUEST message are discarded, if any.

a) Semantic errors in QoS operations:

1) When the rule operation is "Create new QoS rule" and the DQR bit is set to "the QoS rule is the default QoS rule" when there's already a default QoS rule.

2) When the rule operation is received in an ACTIVATE DEFAULT EPS BEARER CONTEXT REQUEST message, the rule operation is "Create new QoS rule", and there is no rule with the DQR bit set to "the QoS rule is the default QoS rule".

3) When the rule operation is "Create new QoS rule" and two or more QoS rules associated with this PDU session would have identical precedence values.

4) When the rule operation is an operation other than "Create new QoS rule".

5) When the flow description operation is an operation other than "Create new QoS flow description".

6) When the UE determines that:

i) the default EPS bearer context is associated with one or more QoS flows but the default EPS bearer context is not associated with the default QoS rules.

ii) a dedicated EPS bearer context is associated with one or more QoS flows but the dedicated EPS bearer context is associated with the default QoS rule.

7) When the flow description operation is received in an ACTIVATE DEDICATED EPS BEARER CONTEXT REQUEST message, the flow description operation is "Create new QoS flow description" and there is already an existing QoS flow description with the same QoS flow identifier stored for an EPS bearer context different from the EPS bearer context being activated and belonging to the same PDN connection as the EPS bearer context being activated.

8) When the rule operation is received in an ACTIVATE DEDICATED EPS BEARER CONTEXT REQUEST message, the rule operation is "Create new QoS rule" and there is already an existing QoS rule with the same QoS rule identifier stored for an EPS bearer context different from the EPS bearer context being activated and belonging to the same PDN connection as the EPS bearer context being activated.

9) When the rule operation is received in an ACTIVATE DEDICATED EPS BEARER CONTEXT REQUEST message, the rule operation is "Create new QoS rule" and the resultant QoS rule is associated with a QoS flow description stored for an EPS bearer context different from the EPS bearer context being activated and belonging to the same PDN connection as the EPS bearer context being activated.

 In case 4, if the rule operation is for a non-default QoS rule, the UE shall delete the QoS rule. If the QoS rule is the default QoS rule, the UE shall include a Protocol configuration options IE or Extended protocol configuration options IE with a 5GSM cause parameter set to 5GSM cause #83 "semantic error in the QoS operation" in the ACTIVATE DEFAULT EPS BEARER CONTEXT ACCEPT or ACTIVATE DEDICATED EPS BEARER CONTEXT ACCEPT message.

 Otherwise for all the cases above, the UE shall include a Protocol configuration options IE or Extended protocol configuration options IE with a 5GSM cause parameter set to 5GSM cause #83 "semantic error in the QoS operation" in the ACTIVATE DEFAULT EPS BEARER CONTEXT ACCEPT or ACTIVATE DEDICATED EPS BEARER CONTEXT ACCEPT message.

b) Syntactical errors in QoS operations:

1) When the rule operation is "Create new QoS rule", the packet filter list in the QoS rule is empty, and the QoS rule is provided for a PDN connection of PDN type IPv4, IPv6, IPv4v6 or Ethernet, or for a PDN connection of PDN type "non-IP" and there is locally available information associated with the PDN connection that is set to "Ethernet".

2) Void.

3) When there are other types of syntactical errors in the coding of the QoS rules parameter, the QoS rules with the length of two octets parameter, the QoS flow descriptions parameter or the QoS flow descriptions with the length of two octets parameter, such as a mismatch between the number of packet filters subfield, and the number of packet filters in the packet filter list when the rule operation is "delete existing QoS rule" or "create new QoS rule", or the number of packet filters subfield is larger than the maximum possible number of packet filters in the packet filter list (i.e., there is no QoS rule precedence subfield included in the QoS rule IE), the QoS Rule Identifier is set to "no QoS rule identifier assigned", or the QoS flow identifier is set to "no QoS flow identifier assigned.

4) When, the

A) rule operation is "Create new QoS rule", the UE determines, by using the QoS rules QFI as the 5QI, that there is a resulting QoS rule for a GBR QoS flow (as described in 3GPPTS23.501[8] table5.7.4-1), and there is no QoS flow description with a QFI corresponding to the QFI of the resulting QoS rule.

5) When the flow description operation is "Create new QoS flow description", and the UE determines that there is a QoS flow description of a GBR QoS flow (as described in 3GPPTS23.501[8] table5.7.4-1) which lacks at least one of the mandatory parameters (i.e., GFBR uplink, GFBR downlink, MFBR uplink and MFBR downlink). If the QoS flow description does not include a 5QI, the UE determines this by using the QFI as the 5QI.

 In case 1, case 3 or case 4, if the QoS rule is not the default QoS rule, the UE shall delete the QoS rule. If the QoS rule is the default QoS rule, the UE shall include a Protocol configuration options IE or Extended protocol configuration options IE with a 5GSM cause parameter set to 5GSM cause #84 "syntactical error in the QoS operation" in the ACTIVATE DEFAULT EPS BEARER CONTEXT ACCEPT or ACTIVATE DEDICATED EPS BEARER CONTEXT ACCEPT message.

 In case 5, the UE shall include a Protocol configuration options IE or Extended protocol configuration options IE with a 5GSM cause parameter set to 5GSM cause #84 "syntactical error in the QoS operation" in the ACTIVATE DEFAULT EPS BEARER CONTEXT ACCEPT or ACTIVATE DEDICATED EPS BEARER CONTEXT ACCEPT message.

NOTE7: It is not considered an error if the UE determines that after processing all QoS operations on QoS rules and QoS flow descriptions there is a QoS flow description that is not associated with any QoS rule and the UE is not in NB-N1 mode.

c) Semantic errors in packet filters:

1) When a packet filter consists of conflicting packet filter components which would render the packet filter ineffective, i.e. no IP packet will ever fit this packet filter. How the UE determines a semantic error in a packet filter is outside the scope of the present document.

 The UE shall include a Protocol configuration options IE or Extended protocol configuration options IE with a 5GSM cause parameter set to 5GSM cause #44 "semantic errors in packet filter(s)" in the ACTIVATE DEFAULT EPS BEARER CONTEXT ACCEPT or ACTIVATE DEDICATED EPS BEARER CONTEXT ACCEPT message.

d) Syntactical errors in packet filters:

1) When the rule operation is "Create new QoS rule" and two or more packet filters in the resultant QoS rule would have identical packet filter identifiers.

2) When there are other types of syntactical errors in the coding of packet filters, such as the use of a reserved value for a packet filter component identifier.

 The UE shall delete the QoS rule and include a Protocol configuration options IE or Extended protocol configuration options IE with a 5GSM cause parameter set to 5GSM cause #45 "syntactical error in packet filter(s)" in the ACTIVATE DEFAULT EPS BEARER CONTEXT ACCEPT or ACTIVATE DEDICATED EPS BEARER CONTEXT ACCEPT message.

If the UE detects different errors in the QoS rules and QoS flow descriptions as described in this subclause which requires sending a 5GSM cause parameter in the ACTIVATE DEFAULT EPS BEARER CONTEXT ACCEPT or ACTIVATE DEDICATED EPS BEARER CONTEXT ACCEPT message, the UE shall include a single 5GSM cause parameter in the ACTIVATE DEFAULT EPS BEARER CONTEXT ACCEPT or ACTIVATE DEDICATED EPS BEARER CONTEXT ACCEPT message.

NOTE8: The 5GSM cause to use cannot be different from #44 "semantic error in packet filter(s)", #45 "syntactical errors in packet filter(s)", #83 "semantic error in the QoS operation" or #84 "syntactical error in the QoS operation". The selection of a 5GSM cause is up to UE implementation.

Upon inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode, the UE uses the parameters from the default EPS bearer context of each PDN connection for which interworking to 5GS is supported to create a corresponding PDU session associated with 3GPP access as follows, unless the PDN connection is a user-plane resource of an MA PDU session:

a) the PDN type of the default EPS bearer context shall be mapped to the PDU session type of the PDU session as follows:

1) if the PDN type is "non-IP":

- the PDU session type is set to the locally available information associated with the PDN connection (either "Ethernet" or "Unstructured"), if available; or

- otherwise, the PDU session type is set to "Unstructured";

2) if the PDN type is "IPv4" the PDU session type is set to "IPv4";

3) if the PDN type is "IPv6", the PDU session type is set to "IPv6";

4) if the PDN type is "IPv4v6", the PDU session type is set to "IPv4v6"; and

5) if the PDN type is "Ethernet", the PDU session type is "Ethernet";

b) the PDN address of the default EPS bearer context shall be mapped to PDU address of the PDU session, if the PDN type is "IPv4", "IPv6" or "IPv4v6";

c) the APN of the default EPS bearer context shall be mapped to the DNN of the PDU session, unless the PDN connection is an emergency PDN connection;

d) for each default EPS bearer context in state BEARER CONTEXT ACTIVE the UE shall set the state of the mapped PDU session to PDU SESSION ACTIVE; and

e) for any other default EPS bearer context the UE shall set the state of the mapped PDU session to PDU SESSION INACTIVE.

Additionally, the UE shall set:

a) the PDU session identity of the PDU session to the PDU session identity included by the UE in the Protocol configuration options IE or Extended protocol configuration options IE in the PDN CONNECTIVITY REQUEST message, or the PDU session identity associated with the default EPS bearer context;

b) the S-NSSAI of the PDU session to the S-NSSAI included by the network in the Protocol configuration options IE or Extended protocol configuration options IE in the ACTIVATE DEFAULT EPS BEARER REQUEST message, or the S-NSSAI associated with the default EPS bearer context, if the PDN connection is a non-emergency PDN connection;

c) the session-AMBR of the PDU session to the session-AMBR included by the network in the Protocol configuration options IE or Extended protocol configuration options IE in the ACTIVATE DEFAULT EPS BEARER REQUEST message or the MODIFY EPS BEARER CONTEXT REQUEST message, or the session-AMBR associated with the default EPS bearer context;

d) the SSC mode of the PDU session to "SSC mode 1"; and

e) the always-on PDU session indication to the always-on PDU session indication maintained in the UE, if any.

Upon inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode, for each PDN connection which is a user-plane resource of MA PDU session and for which interworking to 5GS is supported, the UE shall consider that the MA PDU session is established over 3GPP access and, unless the MA PDU session is established over non-3GPP access too, the UE shall set the session-AMBR of the PDU session to the session-AMBR included by the network in the Protocol configuration options IE or Extended protocol configuration options IE in the ACTIVATE DEFAULT EPS BEARER REQUEST message or the MODIFY EPS BEARER CONTEXT REQUEST message, or the session-AMBR associated with the default EPS bearer context of the PDN connection.

Additionally, for each EPS bearer context of the PDN connection, the UE shall create QoS flow(s) each of which is associated with the QoS flow description received in the Protocol configuration options IE or Extended protocol configuration options IE in the ACTIVATE DEFAULT EPS BEARER REQUEST message, ACTIVATE DEDICATED EPS BEARER REQUEST message, and/or MODIFY EPS BEARER REQUEST message (see 3GPPTS24.301[15]), or the QoS flow description associated with EPS bearer context, unless:

a) the PDU session is an MA PDU session which:

1) is established over non-3GPP access; and

2) has a PDN connection as a user-plane resource; and

b) the QoS flow already exists over the non-3GPP access.

Additionally, for each EPS bearer context of the PDN connection, the UE shall create QoS rules(s), if any, each of which is associated with the QoS rule received in the Protocol configuration options IE or Extended protocol configuration options IE in the ACTIVATE DEFAULT EPS BEARER REQUEST message, ACTIVATE DEDICATED EPS BEARER REQUEST message, or MODIFY EPS BEARER CONTEXT REQUEST message (see 3GPPTS24.301[15]), or the QoS rules associated with EPS bearer context, unless:

a) the PDU session is an MA PDU session which:

1) is established over non-3GPP access; and

2) has a PDN connection as a user-plane resource; and

b) the QoS rule already exists over the non-3GPP access.

NOTE9: For a QoS rule which does not exist over non-3GPP access, the UE does not create the QoS rule if the QoS rule is the default QoS rule, or the precedence value of the QoS rule equals to the precedence value of a QoS rule exists over the non-3GPP access.

Additionally, for each PDU session which was created at inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode from a corresponding PDN connection of the "Ethernet" PDN type, the UE shall consider that Ethernet PDN type in S1 mode is supported by the network and the SMF shall consider that Ethernet PDN type in S1 mode is supported by the UE.

The UE and the network shall locally release the PDN connection(s) and EPS bearer context(s) associated with the 3GPP access which have not been transferred to 5GS.

After inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode, for each QoS flow mapped from an EPS bearer context the UE shall associate the EPS bearer identity, the EPS QoS parameters, the extended EPS QoS parameters, and the traffic flow template, if available, of the EPS bearer context with the QoS flow.

After inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode, for each QoS flow of an MA PDU session which:

a) is established over non-3GPP access; and

b) has a PDN connection as a user-plane resource;

such that the QoS flow was received in the Protocol configuration options IE or Extended protocol configuration options IE in the ACTIVATE DEFAULT EPS BEARER REQUEST message, ACTIVATE DEDICATED EPS BEARER REQUEST message, MODIFY EPS BEARER CONTEXT REQUEST message, (see 3GPPTS24.301[15]), or associated with EPS bearer context, the UE shall associate the EPS bearer identity, the EPS QoS parameters, the extended EPS QoS parameters, and the traffic flow template, if available, of the EPS bearer context with the QoS flow.

If the EPS bearer context(s) of the PDN connection are associated with the control plane only indication, and the PDN connection supports interworking to 5GS, after inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode, the UE shall associate the PDU session corresponding to the PDN connection with the control plane only indication.

If the default EPS bearer context of the PDN connection is associated with the PDU session pair ID, and the PDN connection supports interworking to 5GS, after inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode, the UE shall associate the PDU session corresponding to the PDN connection with the PDU session pair ID. If the default EPS bearer context of the PDN connection is associated with the RSN, and the PDN connection supports interworking to 5GS, after inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode, the UE shall associate the PDU session corresponding to the PDN connection with the RSN.

If there is an EPS bearer used for IMS signalling, after inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode, the QoS flow of the default QoS rule in the corresponding PDU session is used for IMS signalling.

For a PDN connection established when in S1 mode, upon the first inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode, the SMF shall determine the PDU session indication as specified in subclause6.3.2.2.

When the UE is provided with one or more mapped EPS bearer contexts in the Mapped EPS bearer contexts IE of the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message, the UE shall process the mapped EPS bearer contexts sequentially starting with the first mapped EPS bearer context.

When the UE is provided with a new EPS bearer identity, a new EPS QoS parameters, a new extended EPS QoS parameters, a new APN-AMBR or a new extended APN-AMBR in the Mapped EPS bearer context IE of the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message for a QoS flow, the UE shall discard the corresponding association(s) and associate the new value(s) with the QoS flow.

When the UE is provided with a new traffic flow template in the Mapped EPS bearer contexts IE of the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message for a QoS flow, the UE shall check the traffic flow template for different types of TFT IE errors as specified in subclause6.3.2.3.

When a QoS flow is deleted, the associated EPS bearer context information that are mapped from the deleted QoS flow shall be deleted from the UE and the network if there is no other existing QoS flow associated with this EPS bearer context. When the EPS bearer identity of a QoS flow is deleted, the associated EPS bearer context information that are mapped from the deleted EPS bearer identity shall be deleted from the UE and the network if there is no other existing QoS flow associated with this EPS bearer context. When an EPS bearer is released, all the associated QoS flow descriptions and QoS rules that are mapped from the released EPS bearer shall be deleted from the UE and the network.

NOTE10: If T3584 is running or deactivated for the S-NSSAI and optionally the DNN combination, the UE is allowed to initate ESM procedures in EPS with or without APN corresponding to that DNN, and if the APN is congested in EPS, the MME can send a back-off timer for the APN to the UE as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15].

Upon inter-system change from N1 mode to S1 mode, if the UE has any PDU sessions associated with one or more MBS multicast sessions, the UE shall locally leave the associated MBS multicast sessions and the network shall consider the UE as removed from the associated MBS sessions.

For the case of handover of an existing PDU session from 3GPP access to non-3GPP access,

- upon receipt of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message, the UE locally deletes the EPS bearer identities for the PDU session, if any (see subclause6.4.1.3); and

- after successful handover, the network shall locally delete the EPS bearer identities for the PDU session, if any.

6.1.4.2 Coordination between 5GSM and ESM without N26 interface

When the network does not support N26 interface, the SMF does not provide the UE with the mapped EPS bearer context for a PDU session.

NOTE1: Since the SMF does not provide the UE with the mapped EPS bearer context for a PDU session, the UE does not know whether interworking with EPS is supported for a PDU session before attempting to transfer the PDU session from N1 mode to S1 mode.

NOTE2: It is up to UE implementation to decide which PDU session(s) to be attempted to transfer from N1 mode to S1 mode, e.g. based on UE policy or UE local configuration.

Upon inter-system change from N1 mode to S1 mode in EMM-IDLE mode, the UE shall not transfer a PDU session for LADN to EPS.

Upon inter-system change from N1 mode to S1 mode in EMM-IDLE mode, the UE shall not transfer a multi-homed IPv6 PDU session to EPS.

Upon inter-system change from N1 mode to S1 mode in EMM-IDLE mode, the UE shall use the parameters from each PDU session which the UE intends to transfer to EPS to create the contents of a PDN CONNECTIVITY REQUEST message as follows:

a) if the PDU session is an emergency PDU session, the request type shall be set to "handover of emergency bearer services". Otherwise the request type shall be set to "handover";

b) the PDU session type of the PDU session shall be mapped to the PDN type of the default EPS bearer context as follows:

1) the PDN type shall be set to "non-IP" if the PDU session type is "Unstructured";

2) the PDN type shall be set to "IPv4" if the PDU session type is "IPv4";

3) the PDN type shall be set to "IPv6" if the PDU session type is "IPv6";

4) the PDN type shall be set to "IPv4v6" if the PDU session type is "IPv4v6";

5) the PDN type shall be set to "non-IP" if the PDU session type is "Ethernet" and the UE, the network or both of them do not support Ethernet PDN type in S1 mode; and

6) the PDN type shall be set to "Ethernet" if the PDU session type is "Ethernet" and the UE and the network support Ethernet PDN type in S1 mode;

c) the DNN of the PDU session shall be mapped to the APN of the default EPS bearer context, unless the PDU session is an emergency PDU session;

d) the PDU session ID parameter in the Protocol configuration options IE or Extended protocol configuration options IE shall be set to the PDU session identity of the PDU session; and

e) if the PDU session is an MA PDU session established over 3GPP access, the ATSSS request parameter shall be included in the Protocol configuration options IE or Extended protocol configuration options IE.

After inter-system change from N1 mode to S1 mode, the UE shall associate the PDU session identity with the default EPS bearer context. If the PDU session being transferred is a non-emergency PDU session, the UE shall in addition associate the S-NSSAI and the PLMN ID of the current PLMN with the default EPS bearer context.

Upon successful completion of an EPS attach procedure after inter-system change from N1 mode to S1 mode (see 3GPPTS24.301[15]), the UE shall delete any UE derived QoS rules except when the PDU session is an MA PDU session established over 3GPP access and non-3GPP access.

The UE shall perform a local release of the PDU session(s) and QoS flow(s) associated with the 3GPP access which have not been transferred to EPS. The UE shall also perform a local release of any QoS flow description not associated with any QoS rule.

For PDU session(s) associated with non-3GPP access in 5GS, if present, the UE may:

a) keep some or all of these PDU sessions still associated with non-3GPP access in 5GS, if supported;

b) release some or all of these PDU sessions explicitly by initiating the UE requested PDU session release procedure(s); or

c) attempt to transfer some or all of these PDU sessions from N1 mode to S1 mode by initiating the UE requested PDN connectivity procedure(s) with the PDN CONNECTIVITY REQUEST message created as above.

When the network does not support N26 interface, the MME does not provide the UE with the mapped PDU session for a PDN connection but provides the UE with an S-NSSAI if the PDN connection is not for emergency bearer services. When establishing a new PDN connection in S1 mode, to enable the UE to attempt to transfer the PDN connection from S1 mode to N1 mode in case of inter-system change, the UE shall allocate a PDU session identity, indicate the allocated PDU session identity in the PDU session ID parameter in the Protocol configuration options IE of the PDN CONNECTIVITY REQUEST message and associate the allocated PDU session identity with the default EPS bearer context of the PDN connection. If an N5CW device supports 3GPP access and establishes a new PDN connection in S1 mode, the N5CW device shall refrain from allocating "PDU session identity value 15". The network provides the UE with an S-NSSAI and the related PLMN ID in the Protocol configuration options IE or Extended protocol configuration options IE of the ACTIVATE DEFAULT EPS BEARER REQUEST message, the UE shall delete the stored S-NSSAI and the related PLMN ID, if any, and shall store the S-NSSAI and the related PLMN ID provided in the ACTIVATE DEFAULT EPS BEARER CONTEXT REQUEST message.

NOTE3: Since the MME does not provide the UE with the mapped PDU session for a PDN connection, the UE does not know whether interworking to 5GS is supported for a PDN connection for which the UE assigned a PDU Session identity before attempting to transfer the PDN connection from S1 mode to N1 mode.

NOTE4: It is up to UE implementation to decide which PDN connection(s) to be attempted to transfer from S1 mode to N1 mode, e.g. based on UE policy or UE local configuration.

NOTE5: If the PDN connection has been transferred from a PDN connection established via non-3GPP access to EPC, it is possible that the network provided the S-NSSAI already during the establishment via non-3GPP access (see 3GPPTS24.302[16]).

Upon inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode in 5GMM-IDLE mode, the UE uses the parameters from the default EPS bearer context of each PDN connection which the UE intends to transfer to 5GS and for which the UE has allocated a PDU session identity to create a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message as follows:

a) if the PDN connection is for emergency bearer services, the request type shall be set to "existing emergency PDU session". Otherwise the request type shall be set to:

1) "MA PDU request", if the PDN connection to be transferred is a user-plane resource of an MA PDU session; or

2) "existing PDU session";

b) the PDN type of the default EPS bearer context shall be mapped to the PDU session type of the PDU session as follows:

1) if the PDN type is "non-IP":

- the PDU session type is set to the locally available information associated with the PDN connection (either "Ethernet" or "Unstructured"), if available; or

- otherwise, the PDU session type is set to "Unstructured";

2) if the PDN type is "IPv4" the PDU session type is set to "IPv4";

3) if the PDN type is "IPv6", the PDU session type is set to "IPv6";

4) if the PDN type is "IPv4v6", the PDU session type is set to "IPv4v6"; and

5) if the PDN type is "Ethernet", the PDU session type is set to "Ethernet"; and

c) the APN of the default EPS bearer context shall be mapped to the DNN of the PDU session, unless the PDN connection is an emergency PDN connection;

d) the PDU session ID shall be set to the PDU session identity included by the UE in the Protocol configuration options IE or Extended protocol configuration options IE in the PDN CONNECTIVITY REQUEST message, or to the PDU session ID associated with the default EPS bearer context; and

e) if the PDU session is not an emergency PDU session, the S-NSSAI of the PDU session shall be set to the S-NSSAI included by the network in the Protocol configuration options IE or Extended protocol configuration options IE in the ACTIVATE DEFAULT EPS BEARER REQUEST message, if provided by the network, or the S-NSSAI associated with the default EPS bearer context, if available.

NOTE6: If T3584 is running or deactivated for the S-NSSAI and optionally the DNN combination, the UE is allowed to initiate ESM procedures in EPS with or without APN corresponding to that DNN, and if the APN is congested in EPS, the MME can send a back-off timer for the APN to the UE as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15].

The UE shall locally release the PDN connection(s) and EPS bearer(s) associated with the 3GPP access which have not been transferred to 5GS.

Upon inter-system change from N1 mode to S1 mode, if the UE has any PDU sessions associated with one or more MBS multicast sessions, the UE shall locally leave the associated MBS multicast sessions and the network shall consider the UE as removed from the associated MBS sessions.

6.1.4a Coordination between 5GSM and SM

Coordination between 5GSM and SM states is not required.

After the 5G-SRVCC handover from NG-RAN to UTRAN (see 3GPPTS23.216[6A]), all the PDU sessions of the UE are locally released at the UE and the network.

6.1.5 Coordination for interworking with ePDG connected to EPC

When the UE establishes a new PDN connection via an ePDG connected to EPC, to enable the transfer of the PDN connection to N1 mode in case of inter-system change, the UE allocates a PDU session identity and indicates its value in the PDU session ID field in the N1_MODE_CAPABILITY Notify payload of the IKE_AUTH request message (see 3GPPTS24.302[16]). The network provides the UE with an S-NSSAI in the N1_MODE_INFORMATION Notify payload of the IKE_AUTH response message (see 3GPPTS24.302[16]).

Upon inter-system change to N1 mode, for PDN connection(s) established via an ePDG connected to EPC, if present, the UE may:

a) keep some or all of these PDN connections still via ePDG connected to EPC, if supported;

b) release some or all of these PDN connections explicitly by initiating the UE initiated tunnel disconnection procedure(s) as specified in 3GPPTS24.302[16]; or

c) attempt to transfer some or all of these PDN connections to N1 mode using the parameters of the PDN connection for which the UE has allocated a PDU session identity by initiating the PDU session establishment procedure(s) with the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message created. In that case, for each and every PDN connection to be transferred:

1) if the PDN connection is for emergency bearer services, the request type shall be set to "existing emergency PDU session". Otherwise the request type shall be set to "existing PDU session";

2) if the previously allocated home address information for a PDN connection consists of an IPv4 address only for an ePDG connected to EPC according to 3GPPTS24.302[16], the PDU session type shall be set to "IPv4";

3) if the previously allocated home address information for a PDN connection consists of an IPv6 prefix only for an ePDG connected to EPC according to 3GPPTS24.302[16], the PDU session type shall be set to "IPv6";

4) if the previously allocated home address information for a PDN connection consists of both an IPv4 address and an IPv6 prefix for an ePDG connected to EPC according to 3GPPTS24.302[16], the PDU session type shall be set to "IPv4v6";

5) the APN of the PDN connection shall be mapped to the DNN of the PDU session;

6) the PDU session ID shall be set to the PDU session identity in the N1_MODE_CAPABILITY Notify payload of the IKE_AUTH request message establishing IPsec tunnel of the PDN connection; and

7) if the PDN connection is not for emergency bearer services, the S-NSSAI of the PDU session shall be set to the S-NSSAI associated with the PDN connection as specified in 3GPPTS24.302[16]. The UE shall not request to perform handover of an existing PDN connection to N1 mode if the associated S-NSSAI is not included in the allowed NSSAI for the target access.

6.2 General on elementary 5GSM procedures

6.2.1 Principles of PTI handling for 5GSM procedures

When the UE or the network initiates a transaction related procedure (i.e. a procedure consisting of more than one message and the messages are related), it shall include a valid PTI value in the message header of the request message or of the command message.

If a response message is sent as result of a received request message or a received command message, the sending entity shall include in the response message the PTI value received within the request message or within the command message (see examples in figure6.2.1.1, figure6.2.1.2, and figure6.2.1.3).

If a command message is sent as result of a received request message, the sending entity shall include in the command message the PTI value received with the request message (see examples in figure6.2.1.3).

If a command message is not sent as result of a received request message, the sending entity shall include in the command message the PTI value set to "no procedure transaction identity assigned" (see examples in figure6.2.1.4).



Figure6.2.1.1: UE-requested transaction related procedure accepted by the network



Figure6.2.1.2: UE-requested transaction related procedure rejected by the network



Figure6.2.1.3: UE-requested transaction related procedure triggering a network-requested transaction related procedure



Figure6.2.1.4: network-requested transaction related procedure not triggered by a UE-requested transaction related procedure

6.2.2 PDU session types

The following PDU Session types are supported:

a) IPv4;

b) IPv6;

c) IPv4v6;

d) Ethernet (EtherType as defined in IEEEStd802.3[31A]); and

e) Unstructured.

IP address allocation for IPv4, IPv6 and IPv4v6 PDU session types is described in subclause6.2.4.

Neither a MAC nor an IP address is allocated by the 5GCN to the UE for Ethernet PDU session type.

6.2.3 PDU session management

The SMF is responsible for the session management functions to provide the PDU connectivity service to the UE via the 5GSM signalling between UE and SMF. The session management procedures includes:

a) the UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure;

b) the PDU session authentication and authorization procedure;

c) the UE-requested PDU session modification procedure;

d) the network-requested PDU session modification procedure;

e) the UE-requested PDU session release procedure; and

f) the network-requested PDU session release procedure.

A UE may establish multiple PDU sessions, to the same data network or to different data networks, via 3GPP and via and Non-3GPP access networks at the same time.

The session management messages between UE and SMF are transferred via AMF as specified in subclause8.3.

6.2.4 IP address allocation

6.2.4.1 General

This clause specifies IP address allocation for the PDU session.

In this release of specification, PDU session can be initiated with one IP version, i.e. IPv4 PDU session type or IPv6 PDU session type, or with both IP versions, i.e. IPv4v6 PDU session type.

IP address allocation to the UE shall be performed by SMF based on one or both the selected IP versions and operator policies. If IPv4 PDU session type is selected, an IPv4 address is allocated to the UE. If IPv6 PDU session type is selected, an IPv6 prefix except when the SMF acts according to subclause6.2.4.3, and an interface identifier for the IPv6 link local address are allocated to the UE. If IPv4v6 PDU session type is selected, an IPv4 address, an IPv6 prefix except when the SMF acts according to subclause6.2.4.3 or 6.2.4.4, and an interface identifier for the IPv6 link local address are allocated to the UE. If IPv6 or IPv4v6 PDU session type is selected in a PDU session established by the W-AGF acting on behalf of the FN-RG and the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message contains the Suggested interface identifier IE, the SMF shall allocate to the UE the interface identifier for the IPv6 link local address indicated in the Suggested interface identifier IE.

For IPv4 PDU session type and for IPv4v6 PDU session type, the UE:

a) shall obtain an IPv4 address via:

1) NAS signalling as specified in subclause6.2.4.2; or

2) DHCPv4; and

b) may obtain IPv4 configuration parameters (e.g. DNS server address) via DHCPv4 or may receive IPv4 configuration parameters (e.g. DNS server address) as specified in subclause6.4.1 and subclause6.3.2.

For IPv6 PDU session type and for IPv4v6 PDU session type, the UE:

a) shall build an IPv6 link local address based on the allocated interface identifier for the IPv6 link local address;

b) shall obtain /64 IPv6 prefix via IPv6 stateless address autoconfiguration as specified in 3GPPTS23.501[8] and IETFRFC4862[39], except when the 5G-RG or the W-AGF act according to subclause6.2.4.3; and

c) may obtain IPv6 configuration parameters via stateless DHCPv6 as specified in IETFRFC8415[33D], except when the 5G-RG or the W-AGF act according to subclause6.2.4.3, may receive IPv6 configuration parameters (e.g. DNS server address) as specified in subclause6.4.1 and subclause6.3.2, or may receive DNS server IPv6 addresses in a Router Advertisement Message as specified in IETFRFC4861[38B] with recursive DNS server option as specified in IETFRFC8106[52].

6.2.4.2 IP address allocation via NAS signalling

The UE shall set the PDU session type IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message, based on its IP stack capabilities if the UE requests IP connectivity as follows:

a) A UE:

1) which is IPv6 and IPv4 capable, shall set the PDU session type IE to IPv4, IPv6 or IPv4v6 according to UE configuration or received policy.

2) which is only IPv6 capable, shall set the PDU session type IE to IPv6.

3) which is only IPv4 capable, shall set the PDU session type IE to IPv4.

b) When the IP version capability of the UE is unknown in the UE (as in the case when the MT and TE are separated and the capability of the TE is not known in the MT), the UE shall set the PDU session type IE to IPv4v6.

If the UE wants to use DHCPv4 for IPv4 address assignment, it shall indicate that to the network within the Extended protocol configuration options IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST.

On receipt of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message sent by the UE, the network when allocating an IP address shall take into account the PDU session type IE, the operator's policies of the network, and the user's subscription data and:

a) if the network sets the Selected PDU session type IE to IPv4, the network shall include an IPv4 address in the PDU address IE;

b) if the network sets the Selected PDU session type IE to IPv6, the network shall include an interface identifier for the IPv6 link local address in the PDU address IE; and

c) if the network sets the Selected PDU session type IE to IPv4v6, the network shall include an IPv4 address and an interface identifier for the IPv6 link local address in the PDU address IE.

6.2.4.3 Additional RG related requirements for IP address allocation

If IPv6 PDU session type or IPv4v6 PDU session type is selected, an IPv6 address, one or more IPv6 prefixes or both are allocated to the 5G-RG or the W-AGF acting on behalf of the FN-RG (or on behalf of the N5GC device).

If the 5G-RG or the W-AGF acting on behalf of the FN-RG (or on behalf of the N5GC device) receives a Router Advertisement Message as specified in IETFRFC4861[38B] with the "Managed address configuration" flag set to zero, the 5G-RG and the W-AGF acting on behalf of the FN-RG (or on behalf of the N5GC device):

a) shall obtain /64 IPv6 prefix via IPv6 stateless address autoconfiguration as specified in 3GPPTS23.501[8] and IETFRFC4862[39];

b) may obtain IPv6 configuration parameters via stateless DHCPv6 as specified in IETFRFC8415[33D]; and

c) may request additional IPv6 prefixes using DHCPv6. If the 5G-RG and the W-AGF acting on behalf of the FN-RG (or on behalf of the N5GC device) request IPv6 prefixes using DHCPv6, the 5G-RG and the W-AGF acting on behalf of the FN-RG (or on behalf of the N5GC device) shall act as a "Requesting Router" as described in IETFRFC3633[33C], shall obtain IPv6 prefixes using the DHCPv6 Identity association for prefix delegation option as specified in IETFRFC8415[33D], may include DHCPv6 Rapid commit option as specified in IETFRFC8415[33D] in a DHCP message, and may include DHCPv6 OPTION_ORO option with the OPTION_PD_EXCLUDE option code as specified in IETFRFC6603[40A] in the DHCP message.

NOTE1: The 5G-RG and the W-AGF acting on behalf of the FN-RG (or on behalf of the N5GC device) can include several DHCP options in a DHCP message.

If the 5G-RG or the W-AGF acting on behalf of the FN-RG receives a Router Advertisement Message as specified in IETFRFC4861[38B] with the "Managed address configuration" flag set to one, the 5G-RG and the W-AGF acting on behalf of the FN-RG:

a) shall obtain an IPv6 address via DHCPv6 and the DHCPv6 Identity association for non-temporary addresses option as specified in IETFRFC8415[33D];

b) may obtain IPv6 configuration parameters via DHCPv6 as specified in IETFRFC8415[33D]; and

c) may request IPv6 prefixes using DHCPv6. If the 5G-RG and the W-AGF acting on behalf of the FN-RG requests IPv6 prefixes using DHCPv6, the 5G-RG and the W-AGF acting on behalf of the FN-RG shall act as a "Requesting Router" as described in IETFRFC8415[33D], shall obtain IPv6 prefixes using the DHCPv6 Identity association for prefix delegation option as specified in IETFRFC8415[33D], may include DHCPv6 Rapid commit option as specified in IETFRFC8415[33D] in a DHCP message, and may include DHCPv6 OPTION_ORO option with the OPTION_PD_EXCLUDE option code as specified in IETFRFC6603[40A] in the DHCP message.

NOTE2: The 5G-RG and the W-AGF acting on behalf of the FN-RG (or on behalf of the N5GC device) can include several DHCP options in a DHCP message.

The 5G-RG may obtain ACS information via DHCP as specified in clause3.1 of BBFTR-069[49] or in BBFTR-369[50] R-DIS.1 and R-DIS.2.

6.2.4.4 Additional requirements of the UE acting as 5G ProSe layer-3 UE-to-network relay UE for IP address allocation

If a UE acting as 5G ProSe layer-3 UE-to-network relay needs to indicate "IPv6 Router" or "DHCPv4 Server & IPv6 Router" in the IP address configuration IE as specified in 3GPP24.554[19E], the UE shall support acting as a "Requesting Router" as described in IETFRFC8415[33D] to request additional IPv6 prefixes (i.e. prefixes in addition to the /64 default prefix which was allocated via stateless IPv6 address autoconfiguration as specified in subclause6.2.4.1) from the SMF as specified in subclause5.5.2 of 3GPPTS23.304[6E].

When the UE acting as 5G ProSe layer-3 UE-to-network relay UE requests additional prefixes using DHCPv6, the UE:

a) shall include the OPTION_ORO option with the OPTION_PD_EXCLUDE option code as specified in IETFRFC6603[40A] in the DHCP message; and

b) may include the Rapid Commit Option as specified in IETFRFC8415[33D] in the DHCP message.

6.2.5 Quality of service

6.2.5.1 General

6.2.5.1.1 QoS rules

6.2.5.1.1.1 General

In a PDU session of IPv4, IPv6, IPv4v6 and Ethernet PDU session type, the NAS protocol enables different forwarding treatments of UL user data packets in one or more QoS flows based on signalled QoS rules, derived QoS rules or any combination of them.

In a PDU session of Unstructured PDU session type, all UL user data packets are associated with the same QoS flow.

6.2.5.1.1.2 Signalled QoS rules

The NAS protocol enables the network to provide the UE with signalled QoS rules associated with a PDU session.

The network can provide the UE with one or more signalled QoS rules associated with a PDU session at the PDU session establishment or at the PDU session modification.

Each signalled QoS rule contains:

a) an indication of whether the QoS rule is the default QoS rule;

b) a QoS rule identifier (QRI);

c) a QoS flow identifier (QFI);

d) optionally, a set of packet filters; and

e) a precedence value.

NOTE1: The default QoS rule indication (DQR) of a signalled QoS rule cannot be changed.

For case d) above:

1) If the QoS rule is the default QoS rule of a PDU session of IPv4, IPv6, IPv4v6 or Ethernet PDU session type, the set of packet filters contains zero or more packet filters for DL direction, and may additionaly contain one of the following:

A) a match-all packet filter for UL direction;

B) a match-all packet filter for UL and DL directions;

C) zero or more packet filters for UL direction (other than the match-all packet filter for UL direction);

D) zero or more packet filters for UL and DL directions (other than the match-all packet filter for UL and DL directions); or

E) one or more packet filters for UL direction (other than the match-all packet filter for UL direction) and one or more packet filters for UL and DL directions (other than the match-all packet filter for UL and DL directions).

 The set of packet filters for the default QoS rule shall not be empty. If the default QoS rule contains a match-all packet filter, then the highest precedence value shall be used for the default QoS rule.

2) If the QoS rule is a QoS rule of a PDU session of IPv4, IPv6, IPv4v6 or Ethernet PDU session type and is not the default QoS rule, the set of packet filters contains zero or more packet filters for the DL direction, and may additionally contain one of the following:

A) zero or more packet filters for UL direction (other than the match-all packet filter for UL direction); and

B) zero or more packet filters for both UL and DL directions (other than the match-all packet filter for UL and DL directions).

The set of packet filters for a QoS rule which is not the default QoS rule shall not be empty.

3) For PDU session of unstructured PDU session type, there is only one QoS rule associated with it and the set of packet filters of that QoS rule is empty.

If the UE requests a new QoS rule, it shall assign a precedence value for the signalled QoS rule which is not in the range from 70 to 99 (decimal).

NOTE2: In this release of the specification, there is no support for a match-all packet filter for DL direction.

NOTE3: In order to support QoS differentiation in case of access to PLMN services via an SNPN, the UE, within the SNPN, can construct packet filters based on the destination IP address to reach the N3IWF in the PLMN and the security parameters index (SPI) for the IPsec SA.

NOTE4: In order to support QoS differentiation in case of access to SNPN services via a PLMN, the UE, within the PLMN, can construct packet filters based on the destination IP address to reach the N3IWF in the SNPN and the security parameters index (SPI) for the IPsec SA.

NOTE5: The above described condition of assigning a precedence value for the signalled QoS rule is applied to the UE when the UE requests a QoS rule for network to bind service data flows described by the QoS rule to a dedicated QoS flow by setting the segregation bit to 1.

In NB-N1 mode, there is only one QoS rule associated with a PDU session and that is the default QoS rule. As described in 3GPPTS23.501[8], when the SMF determines that the UE has:

a) moved from a tracking area in WB-N1 mode into a tracking area in NB-N1 mode;

b) moved from a tracking area in WB-S1 mode into a tracking area in NB-N1 mode; or

c) moved from a tracking area in NR connected to 5GCN into a tracking area in NB-N1 mode;

the SMF shall, for each PDU session that is kept active, initiate the PDU session modification procedure (see subclause6.3.3.2) to delete every QoS rule that is not the default QoS rule, if any.

Within a PDU session:

a) each signalled QoS rule has a unique QRI;

b) there is at least one signalled QoS rule;

c) one signalled QoS rule is the default QoS rule; and

d) there can be zero, one or more signalled QoS rules associated with a given QFI.

6.2.5.1.1.3 Derived QoS rules

Derived QoS rules are applicable only for PDU session of IPv4, IPv6, IPv4v6 or Ethernet PDU session type.

The reflective QoS in the UE creates derived QoS rules associated with a PDU session based on DL user data packets received via the PDU session.

Each derived QoS rule contains:

a) a QoS flow identifier (QFI);

b) a packet filter for UL direction; and

c) a precedence value of 80 (decimal).

NOTE: On the network side, the corresponding QoS rule can be associated with a different precedence value in the range from 70 to 99 (decimal).

Within a PDU session:

a) there can be zero, one or more derived QoS rules associated with a given QFI; and

b) there can be up to one derived QoS rule associated with a given packet filter for UL direction.

In the UE, a timer T3583 runs for each derived QoS rule.

Reflective QoS is not supported in NB-N1 mode. Reflective QoS is not applicable for a PDU session with control plane only indication.

6.2.5.1.1.4 QoS flow descriptions

The network can also provide the UE with one or more QoS flow descriptions associated with a PDU session at the PDU session establishment or at the PDU session modification.

Each QoS flow description contains:

a) a QoS flow identifier (QFI);

b) if the flow is a GBR QoS flow:

1) Guaranteed flow bit rate (GFBR) for UL;

2) Guaranteed flow bit rate (GFBR) for DL;

3) Maximum flow bit rate (MFBR) for UL;

4) Maximum flow bit rate (MFBR) for DL; and

5) optionally averaging window, applicable for both UL and DL;

c) 5QI, if the QFI is not the same as the 5QI of the QoS flow identified by the QFI; and

d) optionally, an EPS bearer identity (EBI) if the QoS flow can be mapped to an EPS bearer as specified in subclause4.11.1 of 3GPPTS23.502[9].

If the averaging window is not included in a QoS flow description for a GBR QoS flow with a 5QI indicated in 3GPPTS23.501[8] table5.7.4-1, the averaging window associated with the 5QI in 3GPPTS23.501[8] table5.7.4-1 applies for the averaging window.

If the averaging window is not included in a QoS flow description for a GBR QoS flow with a 5QI not indicated in 3GPPTS23.501[8] table5.7.4-1, the standardized value of two seconds is used as the averaging window.

6.2.5.1.2 Session-AMBR

The NAS protocol enables the network to provide the UE with the session-AMBR associated with a PDU session.

The standardized value of two seconds is used as the averaging window for the UE's enforcement of the UL rate limitation indicated by the session-AMBR.

6.2.5.1.2A Void

6.2.5.1.3 UL user data packet matching

For PDU session of IPv4, IPv6, IPv4v6 or Ethernet PDU session type, upon receiving an UL user data packet from the upper layers for transmission via a PDU session, the UE shall attempt to associate the UL user data packet with:

a) the QFI of a signalled QoS rule associated with the PDU session which has a set of packet filters containing a packet filter for UL direction matching the UL user data packet or containing a packet filter for both UL and DL directions matching the UL user data packet; or

b) the QFI of a derived QoS rule associated with the PDU session which has the packet filter for UL direction matching the UL user data packet;

by evaluating the QoS rules in increasing order of their precedence values until the UL user data packet is associated with a QFI or all QoS rules are evaluated.

For PDU session of unstructured PDU session type, upon receiving an UL user data packet from the upper layers for transmission via a PDU session, the UE shall associate the UL user data packet with the QFI of the default QoS rule associated with the PDU session.

If the UL user data packet is associated with a QFI, the UE shall pass the QFI along the UL user data packet to the lower layers for transmission.

NOTE: Marking of the UL user data packet with the QFI is performed by the lower layers.

If all QoS rules are evaluated and the UL user data packet is not associated with a QFI, the UE shall discard the UL user data packet.

6.2.5.1.4 Reflective QoS

6.2.5.1.4.1 General

The UE may support reflective QoS.

If the UE supports the reflective QoS, the UE shall support the procedures in the following subclauses.

The reflective QoS is applicable in a PDU session of IPv4, IPv6, IPv4v6 and Ethernet PDU session type. The reflective QoS is not applicable in a PDU session of Unstructured PDU session type. Reflective QoS is not applicable for a PDU session with control plane only indication.

The UE may request to revoke the usage of reflective QoS for an existing PDU session for which the UE had previously indicated support for reflective QoS.

6.2.5.1.4.2 Derivation of packet filter for UL direction from DL user data packet

If the UE needs to derive a packet filter for UL direction from the DL user data packet (see subclause6.2.5.1.4.3 and 6.2.5.1.4.4), the UE shall proceed as follows:

a) if the received DL user data packet belongs to a PDU session of IPv4 or IPv4v6 PDU session type and is an IPv4 packet and:

1) the protocol field of the received DL user data packet indicates TCP as specified in IETFRFC793[33];

2) the protocol field of the received DL user data packet indicates UDP as specified in IETFRFC768[32]; or

3) the protocol field of the received DL user data packet indicates ESP as specified in IETFRFC4303[38] and an uplink IPSec SA corresponding to a downlink IPSec SA indicated in the security parameters index field of the received DL user data packet exists;

 then the packet filter for UL direction contains the following packet filter components:

1) an IPv4 remote address component set to the value of the source address field of the received DL user data packet;

2) an IPv4 local address component set to the value of the destination address field of the received DL user data packet;

3) a protocol identifier/next header type component set to the value of the protocol field of the received DL user data packet;

4) if the protocol field of the received DL user data packet indicates TCP as specified in IETFRFC793[33] or UDP as specified in IETFRFC768[32]:

i) a single local port type component set to the value of the destination port field of the received DL user data packet; and

ii) a single remote port type component set to the value of the source port field of the received DL user data packet;

5) if the protocol field of the received DL user data packet indicates ESP as specified in IETFRFC4303[38]:

i) a security parameter index type component set to the security parameters index of the uplink IPSec SA corresponding to the downlink IPSec SA indicated in the security parameters index field of the received DL user data packet; and

6) if the protocol field of the received DL user data packet indicates UDP and the received DL user data packet contains a UDP-encapsulated ESP header as specified in IETFRFC3948[55]:

i) a security parameter index type component set to the security parameters index of the uplink IPSec SA corresponding to the downlink IPSec SA indicated in the security parameters index field of the ESP header field of the UDP-encapsulated ESP header as specified in IETFRFC3948[55] of the received DL user data packet;

 otherwise it is not possible to derive a packet filter for UL direction from the DL user data packet;

b) if the received DL user data packet belongs to a PDU session of IPv6 or IPv4v6 PDU session type and is an IPv6 packet and:

1) the last next header field of the received DL user data packet indicates TCP as specified in IETFRFC793[33];

2) the last next header field of the received DL user data packet indicates UDP as specified in IETFRFC768[32]; or

3) the last next header field of the received DL user data packet indicates ESP as specified in IETFRFC4303[38] and an uplink IPSec SA corresponding to a downlink IPSec SA indicated in the security parameters index field of the received DL user data packet exists;

 then the packet filter for UL direction contains the following packet filter components:

1) an IPv6 remote address/prefix length component set to the value of the source address field of the received DL user data packet;

2) an IPv6 local address/prefix length component set to the value of the destination address field of the received DL user data packet;

3) a protocol identifier/next header type component set to the value of the last next header field of the received DL user data packet;

4) if the last next header field of the received DL user data packet indicates TCP as specified in IETFRFC793[33] or UDP as specified in IETFRFC768[32]:

i) a single local port type component set to the value of the destination port field of the received DL user data packet; and

ii) a single remote port type component set to the value of the source port field of the received DL user data packet;

5) if the last next header field of the received DL user data packet indicates ESP as specified in IETFRFC4303[38]:

i) a security parameter index type component set to the security parameters index of the uplink IPSec SA corresponding to the downlink IPSec SA indicated in the security parameters index field of the received DL user data packet; and

6) if the protocol field of the received DL user data packet indicates UDP, and the received DL user data packet contains a UDP-encapsulated ESP header as specified in IETFRFC3948[55]:

i) a security parameter index type component set to the security parameters index of the uplink IPSec SA corresponding to the downlink IPSec SA indicated in the security parameters index field of the ESP header field of the UDP-encapsulated ESP header as specified in IETFRFC3948[55] of the received DL user data packet;

 otherwise it is not possible to derive a packet filter for UL direction from the DL user data packet;

c) if the received DL user data packet belongs to a PDU session of Ethernet PDU session type, the packet filter for UL direction contains the following packet filter components:

1) a destination MAC address component set to the source MAC address of the received DL user data packet;

2) a source MAC address component set to the destination MAC address of the received DL user data packet;

3) if one or more 802.1Q C-TAG is included in the received DL user data packet, an 802.1Q C-TAG VID component set to the 802.1Q C-TAG VID of the received DL user data packet and an 802.1Q C-TAG PCP/DEI component set to the 802.1Q C-TAG PCP/DEI of the received DL user data packet;

4) if one or more 802.1Q S-TAG is included in the received DL user data packet, an 802.1Q S-TAG VID component set to the 802.1Q S-TAG VID of the received DL user data packet and an 802.1Q S-TAG PCP/DEI component set to the 802.1Q S-TAG PCP/DEI of the received DL user data packet;

5) If the Ethertype field of the received DL user data packet is set to a value of 1536 or above, an Ethertype component set to the Ethertype of the received DL user data packet;

6) if the Ethertype field of the Ethernet frame header indicates that the data carried in the Ethernet frame is IPv4 data, the UE shall also add to the packet filter for UL direction the IP-specific components based on the contents of the IP header of the received DL user data packet as described in bullet a) above; and

7) if the Ethertype field of the Ethernet frame header indicates that the data carried in the Ethernet frame is IPv6 data, the UE shall also add to the packet filter for UL direction the IP-specific components based on the contents of the IP header of the received DL user data packet as described in bullet b) above; and

d) if the received DL user data packet belongs to a PDU session of PDU session type other than Ethernet, IPv4, IPv6 and IPv4v6, it is not possible to derive a packet filter for UL direction from the DL user data packet.

6.2.5.1.4.3 Creating a derived QoS rule by reflective QoS in the UE

If the UE receives a DL user data packet marked with a QFI and an RQI, the DL user data packet belongs to a PDU session of IPv4, IPv6, IPv4v6 or Ethernet PDU session type, and the UE does not have a derived QoS rule with the same packet filter for UL direction as the packet filter for UL direction derived from the DL user data packet as specified in subclause6.2.5.1.4.2, then the UE shall create a new derived QoS rule as follows:

a) the QFI of the derived QoS rule is set to the received QFI;

b) the precedence value of the derived QoS rule is set to 80 (decimal); and

c) the packet filter for UL direction of the derived QoS rule is set to the derived packet filter for UL direction;

and the UE shall start the timer T3583 associated with the derived QoS rule with the RQ timer value last received during the UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure of the PDU session (see subclause6.4.1) or the network-requested PDU session modification procedure of the PDU session (see subclause6.4.2). If the RQ timer value was received neither in the UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure of the PDU session nor in any network-requested PDU session modification procedure of the PDU session, the default standardized RQ timer value is used.

6.2.5.1.4.4 Updating a derived QoS rule by reflective QoS in the UE

If the UE receives a DL user data packet associated with a QFI and an RQI, the DL user data packet belongs to a PDU session of IPv4, IPv6, IPv4v6 or Ethernet PDU session type, and the UE has a derived QoS rule with the same packet filter for UL direction as the packet filter for UL direction derived from the DL user data packet as specified in subclause6.2.5.1.4.2:

a) the UE shall re-start the timer T3583 associated with the derived QoS rule with the RQ timer value last received during the UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure of the PDU session (see subclause6.4.1) or the network-requested PDU session modification procedure of the PDU session (see subclause6.4.2). If the RQ timer value was received neither in the UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure of the PDU session nor in any network-requested PDU session modification procedure of the PDU session, the default standardized RQ timer value is used; and

b) if the QFI value associated with the DL user data packet is different from the QFI value stored for the derived QoS rule, the UE shall replace the QFI value stored for the derived QoS rule with the new QFI value for the derived QoS rule.

6.2.5.1.4.5 Deleting a derived QoS rule in the UE

Upon expiry of timer T3583 associated with a derived QoS rule, the UE shall remove the derived QoS rule.

Upon release of the PDU session, the UE shall remove the derived QoS rule(s) associated with the PDU session.

If the network accepts the request from the UE to revoke the usage of reflective QoS and sets the value of the RQ timer to "deactivated" or zero, the UE shall remove the derived QoS rule(s) associated with the PDU session.

Upon inter-system mobility from WB-N1 mode to NB-N1 mode or from NR connected to 5GCN to NB-N1 mode, the UE shall remove the derived QoS rule(s) associated with the PDU session that is kept active.

When a derived QoS rule is deleted, the timer T3583 associated with the derived QoS rule shall be stopped.

6.2.5.1.4.6 Ignoring RQI in the UE

If the UE receives a DL user data packet marked with a QFI and an RQI and it is not possible to derive a packet filter for UL direction from the DL user data packet as specified in subclause6.2.5.1.4.2, the UE shall ignore the RQI and shall handle the received DL user data packet.

6.2.5.2 QoS in MA PDU session

In an MA PDU session, unless it :

a) is established over non-3GPP access; and

b) has a PDN connection as a user-plane resource;

the UE shall have one set of QoS rules, one set of QoS flow descriptions and one session-AMBR. The network can provide the set of QoS rules, the set of QoS flow descriptions and the session-AMBR of the MA PDU session via either access of the MA PDU session. In an MA PDU session, the UE shall support:-

- modification or deletion via an access of a QoS rule or a QoS flow description; and

- modification via an access of the session-AMBR;

of the MA PDU session created via the same or the other access.

In an MA PDU session:

a) established over non-3GPP access; and

b) with a PDN connection as a user-plane resource;

the UE shall have two sets of QoS rules, two sets of QoS flow descriptions and two session-AMBR values - one is maintained via non-3GPP access and the other is associated with EPS bearer contexts of the PDN connection and maintained via extended protocol configuration options IE parameters received via the PDN connection.

6.2.6 Local area data network (LADN)

The UE can receive the local area data network (LADN) information consisting of LADN DNNs and LADN service area information (a set of tracking areas that belong to the current registration area) during the registration procedure or the generic UE configuration update procedure (see subclause5.5.1 and subclause5.4.4).

If the UE is not operating in SNPN access operation mode, the UE considers the received LADN information to be valid only in the TAIs of the registered PLMN that are in the LADN service area information, and in the TAIs of the equivalent PLMNs if the LADN service area information includes TAIs for the equivalent PLMNs. When the AMF provides the UE with LADN service area information containing TAIs for the equivalent PLMNs, the AMF shall include these TAIs of the equivalent PLMNs in the UE's registration area.

If the UE is operating in SNPN access operation mode, the UE considers the received LADN information to be valid only in the TAIs of the registered SNPN that are in the LADN service area information.

The LADN DNN(s) received by the UE is also considered as LADN DNN(s) in the equivalent PLMNs.

The UE shall consider itself to be located inside the LADN service area based on the LADN service area information. If the UE does not have a LADN service area information for the LADN DNN, the UE shall consider itself to be located outside the LADN service area.

When the UE is located in the LADN service area and the UE is in substate 5GMM-REGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE, the UE may initiate:

- the UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure with a LADN DNN to establish a PDU session for LADN;

- the UE-requested PDU session modification procedure to modify the PDU session for LADN; and

- the service request procedure to re-establish the user-plane resources for the PDU session for LADN.

NOTE1: If both the Service area list IE and the LADN information IE were received by the UE, the Service area list IE is evaluated first.

When the UE is located outside the LADN service area, the UE is allowed:

- to initiate the UE-requested PDU session release procedure to release a PDU session for LADN; or

- to initiate the UE-requested PDU session modification procedure to indicate a change of 3GPP PS data off UE status.

If the UE has moved out of the LADN service area, the SMF shall:

a) release the PDU session for LADN; or

b) release the user-plane resources for the PDU session for LADN and maintain the PDU session for LADN;

according to operator's policy.

In case b):

- if the UE has returned to the LADN service area, and the network has downlink user data pending, the network re-establishes the user-plane resources for the PDU session for LADN; and.

- if the UE has not returned to the LADN service area after a period of time according to operator's policy, the SMF may release the PDU session for LADN.

When the UE moves to 5GMM-DEREGISTERED state, the UE shall delete the stored LADN information, if any.

NOTE2: In this release, LADNs apply only to 3GPP access.

Upon inter-system change from N1 mode to S1 mode in EMM-IDLE mode, the UE shall not transfer a PDU session for LADN to EPS.

6.2.7 Handling of DNN based congestion control

The network may detect and start performing DNN based congestion control when one or more DNN congestion criteria as specified in 3GPPTS23.501[8] are met. If the UE does not provide a DNN for a non-emergency PDU session, then the network uses the selected DNN.

In the UE, 5GS session management timers T3396 for DNN based congestion control are started and stopped on a per DNN basis except for an LADN DNN in case of PLMN. For an LADN DNN, 5GS session management timers T3396 for DNN based congestion control is applied to the registered PLMN and its equivalent PLMNs. In case of SNPN, if the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, in the UE, 5GS session management timers T3396 for DNN based congestion control are started and stopped on a per DNN and SNPN basis. If the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, in the UE 5GS session management timers T3396 for DNN based congestion control are started and stopped on a per DNN, SNPN and selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or selected PLMN subscription basis. Upon receipt of a 5GMM message or 5GSM message from the network for which the UE needs to stop the running timers T3396 associated with an LADN DNN as specified in subclause6.3.2.3, 6.3.3.3, 6.4.1.4.2 and 6.4.2.4.2, only the running timer T3396 which is associated with the PLMN and equivalent PLMNs where the timer was started is stopped.

The DNN associated with T3396 is the DNN provided by the UE during the PDU session establishment. If no DNN is provided by the UE along the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST, then T3396 is associated with no DNN. For this purpose, the UE shall memorize the DNN provided to the network during the PDU session establishment. The timer T3396 associated with no DNN will never be started due to any 5GSM procedure related to an emergency PDU session. If the timer T3396 associated with no DNN is running, it does not affect the ability of the UE to request an emergency PDU session.

If T3396 is running or is deactivated, then the UE is not allowed to initiate the:

a) PDU session establishment procedure;

b) PDU session modification procedure; or

c) NAS transport procedure for sending CIoT user data; 

for the respective DNN or without a DNN unless the UE is a UE configured for high priority access in selected PLMN or to report a change of 3GPP PS data off UE status.

6.2.8 Handling of S-NSSAI based congestion control

The network may detect and start performing S-NSSAI based congestion control when one or more S-NSSAI congestion criteria as specified in 3GPPTS23.501[8] are met. If the UE does not provide a DNN for a non-emergency PDU session, then the network uses the selected DNN. If the UE does not provide an S-NSSAI for a non-emergency PDU session, then the network uses the selected S-NSSAI.

In case of PLMN, in the UE, 5GS session management timers T3584 for the S-NSSAI based congestion control are started and stopped on a per S-NSSAI, DNN and PLMN basis. If the 5GSM congestion re-attempt indicator IE with the ABO bit set to "The back-off timer is applied in all PLMNs" is included in the 5GSM message with the 5GSM cause value #67 "insufficient resources for specific slice and DNN", then the UE applies the timer T3584 for all the PLMNs. Otherwise, the UE applies the timer T3584 for the registered PLMN. If the timer T3584 applies for all the PLMNs, the timer T3584 starts when the UE is registered in a VPLMN and the S-NSSAI is provided by the UE during the PDU session establishment, the timer T3584 is associated with the [mapped S-NSSAI, DNN] combination of the PDU session.

In case of PLMN, in the UE, 5GS session management timers T3585 for the S-NSSAI based congestion control are started and stopped on a per S-NSSAI and PLMN basis. If the 5GSM congestion re-attempt indicator IE with the ABO bit set to "The back-off timer is applied in all PLMNs" is included in the 5GSM message with the 5GSM cause value #69 "insufficient resources for specific slice", then the UE applies the timer T3585 for all the PLMNs. Otherwise, the UE applies the timer T3585 for the registered PLMN. If the timer T3585 applies for all the PLMNs, the timer T3585 starts when the UE is registered in a VPLMN and the S-NSSAI is provided by the UE during the PDU session establishment, the timer T3585 is associated with the mapped S-NSSAI of the PDU session. Additionally, if the 5GSM congestion re-attempt indicator IE with the CATBO bit set to "The back-off timer is applied in the current access type" is included in the 5GSM message with the 5GSM cause value #69 "insufficient resources for specific slice", then the UE applies the timer T3585 for the current access type. Otherwise, the UE applies the timer T3585 for both 3GPP access type and non-3GPP access type.

In case of SNPN, if the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, in the UE 5GS session management timers T3584 for the S-NSSAI based congestion control are started and stopped on a per S-NSSAI, DNN and SNPN basis. If the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, in the UE 5GS session management timers T3584 for the S-NSSAI based congestion control are started and stopped on a per S-NSSAI, DNN, SNPN and selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or selected PLMN subscription basis.

In case of SNPN, if the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, in the UE 5GS session management timers T3585 for the S-NSSAI based congestion control are started and stopped on a per S-NSSAI and SNPN basis. If the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, in the UE 5GS session management timers T3585 for the S-NSSAI based congestion control are started and stopped on a per S-NSSAI, SNPN and selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or selected PLMN subscription basis.

The 5GSM congestion re-attempt indicator IE shall not be applicable in an SNPN.

If the timer T3584 or timer T3585 was provided during the PDU session establishment procedure, the S-NSSAI associated with T3584 or T3585, respectively is the S-NSSAI, including no S-NSSAI, provided by the UE during the PDU session establishment.

If the timer T3584 is provided during the PDU session modification or PDU session release procedure, the UE behaves as follows: The DNN associated with T3584 is the DNN provided by the UE during the PDU session establishment. If no S-NSSAI but DNN is provided by the UE along the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message, then T3584 is associated with no S-NSSAI and the DNN provided to the network during the PDU session establishment. If the PDN connection was established when in the S1 mode, then T3584 is associated with no S-NSSAI. If no DNN but S-NSSAI is provided by the UE along the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message, then T3584 is associated with no DNN and the S-NSSAI of the PDU session. If no DNN and no S-NSSAI is provided by the UE along the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message, then T3584 is associated with no DNN and no S-NSSAI. For this purpose, the UE shall memorize the DNN and the S-NSSAI provided to the network during the PDU session establishment. The timer T3584 associated with no DNN and an S-NSSAI will never be started due to any 5GSM procedure related to an emergency PDU session. If the timer T3584 associated with no DNN and an S-NSSAI is running, it does not affect the ability of the UE to request an emergency PDU session.

If the timer T3585 was provided during the PDU session modification or PDU session release procedure, the UE behaves as follows: if an S-NSSAI was provided by the UE during the PDU session establishment, then T3585 is associated with the S-NSSAI of the PDU session. If no S-NSSAI is provided by the UE along the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message, then T3585 is associated with no S-NSSAI. If the PDN connection was established when in the S1 mode, then T3585 is associated with no S-NSSAI.

If T3584 is running or is deactivated, then the UE is not allowed to initiate the:

a) PDU session establishment procedure;

b) PDU session modification procedure; or

c) NAS transport procedure for sending CIoT user data; 

for the respective [S-NSSAI, no DNN] or [S-NSSAI, DNN] combination unless the UE is a UE configured for high priority access in selected PLMN or to report a change of 3GPP PS data off UE status.

If the timer T3584 is running or is deactivated for all the PLMNs and is associated with an S-NSSAI other than no S-NSSAI, then

a) the UE registered in the HPLMN is not allowed to initiate the:

1) PDU session establishment procedure;

2) PDU session modification procedure; or

3) NAS transport procedure for sending CIoT user data;

when the [S-NSSAI, no DNN] or [S-NSSAI, DNN] combination provided by the UE during the PDU session establishment is the same as the [S-NSSAI, no DNN] or [S-NSSAI, DNN] combination associated with the timer T3584 unless the UE is a UE configured for high priority access in selected PLMN or to report a change of 3GPP PS data off UE status; and

b) the UE registered in a VPLMN is not allowed to initiate the:

1) PDU session establishment procedure;

2) PDU session modification procedure; or

3) NAS transport procedure for sending CIoT user data;

when the [mapped S-NSSAI, no DNN] or [mapped S-NSSAI, DNN] combination provided by the UE during the PDU session establishment is the same as the [S-NSSAI, no DNN] or [S-NSSAI, DNN] combination associated with the timer T3584 unless the UE is a UE configured for high priority access in selected PLMN or to report a change of 3GPP PS data off UE status.

If the timer T3584 is running or is deactivated for all the PLMNs and is associated with [no S-NSSAI, no DNN] or [no S-NSSAI, DNN] combination, then the UE is not allowed to initiate the:

a) PDU session establishment procedure;

b) PDU session modification procedure; or

c) NAS transport procedure for sending CIoT user data;

for [no S-NSSAI, no DNN] or [no S-NSSAI, DNN] combination in any PLMN unless the UE is a UE configured for high priority access in selected PLMN or to report a change of 3GPP PS data off UE status.

If T3585 is running or is deactivated, then the UE is neither allowed to initiate the PDU session establishment procedure nor the PDU session modification procedure for the respective S-NSSAI unless the UE is a UE configured for high priority access in selected PLMN or to report a change of 3GPP PS data off UE status.

If the timer T3585 is running or is deactivated for all the PLMNs and is associated with an S-NSSAI other than no S-NSSAI, then

a) the UE registered in the HPLMN is not allowed to initiate the:

1) PDU session establishment procedure;

2) PDU session modification procedure; or

3) NAS transport procedure for sending CIoT user data;

when the S-NSSAI provided by the UE during the PDU session establishment is the same as the S-NSSAI associated with timer T3585 unless the UE is a UE configured for high priority access in selected PLMNs or to report a change of 3GPP PS data off UE status; and

b) the UE registered in a VPLMN is not allowed to initiate the:

1) PDU session establishment procedure;

2) PDU session modification procedure; or

3) NAS transport procedure for sending CIoT user data;

when the mapped S-NSSAI provided by the UE during the PDU session establishment is the same as the S-NSSAI associated the timer T3585 unless the UE is a UE configured for high priority access in selected PLMN or to report a change of 3GPP PS data off UE status.

If the timer T3585 is running or is deactivated for all the PLMNs and is associated with no S-NSSAI, then the UE is not allowed to initiate the:

a) PDU session establishment procedure;

b) PDU session modification procedure;

c) NAS transport procedure for sending CIoT user data;

for no S-NSSAI in any PLMN unless the UE is a UE configured for high priority access in selected PLMN or to report a change of 3GPP PS data off UE status.

6.2.9 Interaction with upper layers

6.2.9.1 General

A 5GSM entity may interact with upper layers. Subclause6.2.9.2 describes how the 5GSM entity interacts with upper layers with respect to the URSP. Subclause6.2.9.3 describes how the 5GSM entity interacts with upper layers with respect to the ProSeP.

6.2.9.2 URSP

The URSP requires interaction between upper layers and the 5GSM entities in the UE (see 3GPPTS24.526[19] for further details). Each of the 5GSM entities in the UE shall indicate attributes (e.g. PDU session identity, SSC mode, S-NSSAI, DNN, PDU session type, access type, PDU address) of a newly established PDU session to the upper layers. If a PDU session is released, the 5GSM entity handling the PDU session shall inform the PDU session identity of the released PDU session to the upper layers. The upper layers may request a 5GSM entity:

a) to establish a PDU session indicating one or more PDU session attributes;

b) to release an existing PDU session; or

c) to establish a PDU session indicating one or more PDU session attributes, and to release an existing PDU session.

6.2.9.3 ProSeP

The ProSeP requires interaction between upper layers and the 5GSM entities in the UE acting as a 5G ProSe layer-3 UE-to-network relay UE (see 3GPPTS24.554[19E] for further details). The upper layers may request the 5GSM entity:

a) to establish a PDU session indicating one or more PDU session attributes; or

b) to release the existing PDU session; or

c) to establish a PDU session indicating one or more PDU session attributes, and to release the existing PDU session.

Each of the 5GSM entities in the UE acting as a 5G ProSe layer-3 UE-to-network relay UE shall indicate attributes (e.g. PDU session identity, SSC mode, S-NSSAI, DNN, PDU session type, access type, PDU address) of the newly established PDU session to the upper layers. If the PDU session is released, the 5GSM entity handling the PDU session shall inform the PDU session identity of the released PDU session to the upper layers.

6.2.10 Handling of 3GPP PS data off

In case of PLMN, a UE, which supports 3GPP PS data off (see 3GPPTS23.501[8]), can be configured with up to two lists of 3GPP PS data off exempt services as specified in 3GPPTS24.368[17] or in the EF3GPPPSDATAOFF USIM file as specified in 3GPPTS31.102[22]:

a) a list of 3GPP PS data off exempt services to be used in the HPLMN or EHPLMN; and

b) a list of 3GPP PS data off exempt services to be used in the VPLMN.

If only the list of 3GPP PS data off exempt services to be used in the HPLMN or EHPLMN is configured at the UE, this list shall be also used in the VPLMN.

In case of SNPN, a UE, which supports 3GPP PS data off (see 3GPPTS23.501[8]), can be configured with:

a) up to two lists of 3GPP PS data off exempt services as specified in 3GPPTS24.368[17] for each subscribed SNPN whose entry exists in the "list of subscriber data":

1) a list of 3GPP PS data off exempt services to be used in the subscribed SNPN; and

2) a list of 3GPP PS data off exempt services to be used in the non-subscribed SNPN; and

b) one list of 3GPP PS data off exempt services as specified in 3GPPTS24.368[17] for PLMN subscription:

1) a list of 3GPP PS data off exempt services to be used in the non-subscribed SNPN.

If only the list of 3GPP PS data off exempt services to be used in the subscribed SNPN is configured for the selected entry of "list of subscriber data", this list shall be also used in the non-subscribed SNPN.

If the UE supports 3GPP PS data off, the UE shall provide the 3GPP PS data off UE status in the Extended protocol configuration options IE during UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure except for the transfer of a PDU session from non-3GPP access to 3GPP access and except for the establishment of user plane resources on the other access for the MA PDU session(see subclause6.4.1), and during UE-requested PDU session modification procedure (see subclause6.4.2), regardless of associated access type of the PDU session. If the UE requests a PDU session establishment procedure in order to transfer a PDU session from non-3GPP access to 3GPP access, or in order to establish user plane resources on the other access for the MA PDU session over 3GPP access or non-3GPP access, and:

a) if the 3GPP PS data off UE status has changed since the last providing to the network, the UE shall provide the 3GPP PS data off UE status in the Extended protocol configuration options IE; or

b) if the 3GPP PS data off UE status has not changed since the last providing to the network, the UE need not provide the 3GPP PS data off UE status.

The network shall support of 3GPP PS data off.

The UE shall indicate change of the 3GPP PS data off UE status for the PDU session by using the UE-requested PDU session modification procedure as specified in subclause6.4.2.

When the 3GPP PS data off UE status is "activated":

a) the UE does not send uplink IP packets via 3GPP access except:

1) for those services indicated in the list of 3GPP PS data off exempt services to be used in the HPLMN or EHPLMN as specified in 3GPPTS24.368[17] when the UE is in its HPLMN or EHPLMN;

2) for those services indicated in the list of 3GPP PS data off exempt services to be used in the subscribed SNPN, configured for the selected entry of "list of subscriber data", as specified in 3GPPTS24.368[17] when the UE is in the subscribed SNPN;

3) for those services indicated in the list of 3GPP PS data off exempt services to be used in the HPLMN or EHPLMN when the UE is in the VPLMN, if only the list of 3GPP PS data off exempt services to be used in the HPLMN or EHPLMN is configured to the UE as specified in 3GPPTS24.368[17];

4) for those services indicated in the list of 3GPP PS data off exempt services to be used in the subscribed SNPN, configured for the selected entry of "list of subscriber data", when the UE is in a non-subscribed SNPN and only the list of 3GPP PS data off exempt services to be used in the subscribed SNPN is configured for the selected entry of "list of subscriber data" as specified in 3GPPTS24.368[17];

5) for those services indicated in the list of 3GPP PS data off exempt services to be used in the VPLMN when the UE is in the VPLMN, if the list of 3GPP PS data off exempt services to be used in the VPLMN is configured to the UE as specified in 3GPPTS24.368[17];

6) for those services indicated in the list of 3GPP PS data off exempt services to be used in the non-subscribed SNPN, configured for the selected entry of "list of subscriber data", when the UE is in a non-subscribed SNPN and the list of 3GPP PS data off exempt services to be used in the non-subscribed SNPN is configured for the selected entry of "list of subscriber data" as specified in 3GPPTS24.368[17];

7) for those services indicated in the list of 3GPP PS data off exempt services to be used in the non-subscribed SNPN, configured for the selected PLMN subscription, when the UE is in the non-subscribed SNPN and the list of 3GPP PS data off exempt services to be used in the non-subscribed SNPN is configured for the selected PLMN subscription as specified in 3GPPTS24.368[17];

8) for those services indicated in the EF3GPPPSDATAOFF USIM file as specified in 3GPPTS31.102[22];

9) any uplink traffic due to procedures specified in 3GPPTS24.229[14]; and

10) any uplink traffic due to procedures specified in 3GPPTS24.623[20];

b) the UE does not send uplink Ethernet user data packets via 3GPP access; and

c) the UE does not send uplink Unstructured user data packets via 3GPP access.

Otherwise the UE sends uplink user data packets without restriction.

NOTE: If the UE supports 3GPP PS data off, uplink IP packets are filtered as specified in 3GPPTS24.229[14] in U.3.1.5.

3GPP PS data off does not restrict sending of uplink user data packets via non-3GPP access of a single access PDU session or an MA PDU session.

6.2.11 Multi-homed IPv6 PDU session

The UE supporting IPv6 may support multi-homed IPv6 PDU session.

If the UE supports the multi-homed IPv6 PDU session:

a) the UE shall support acting as a typeChost as specified in IETFRFC4191[36]; and

b) the UE indicates support of the multi-homed IPv6 PDU session:

1) during the UE-requested PDU session establishment of a PDU session of "IPv6" or "IPv4v6" PDU session type; and

2) during the UE-requested PDU session modification performed after an inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode, for a PDU session associated with a PDN connection established when in S1 mode, if the UE is a UE operating in single-registration mode in a network supporting N26 interface, the PDU session is of "IPv6" or "IPv4v6" PDU session type, and the UE has not previously successfully performed the UE-requested PDU session modification to provide this indication.

6.2.12 Handling of network rejection not due to congestion control

The network may include a back-off timer value in a 5GS session management reject message to regulate the time interval at which the UE may retry the same procedure for 5GSM cause values other than #26 "insufficient resources", #28 "unknown PDU session type", #39 "reactivation requested", #46 "out of LADN service area", #50 "PDU session type IPv4 only allowed", #51 "PDU session type IPv6 only allowed", #54 "PDU session does not exist", #57 "PDU session type IPv4v6 only allowed", #58 "PDU session type Unstructured only allowed", #61 "PDU session type Ethernet only allowed", #67 "insufficient resources for specific slice and DNN", #68 "not supported SSC mode" and #69 "insufficient resources for specific slice". For 5GSM cause values other than #26 "insufficient resources", #28 "unknown PDU session type", #39 "reactivation requested", #46 "out of LADN service area", #54 "PDU session does not exist", #67 "insufficient resources for specific slice and DNN", #68 "not supported SSC mode", and #69 "insufficient resources for specific slice", and #86 "UAS services not allowed", the network may also include the re-attempt indicator to indicate whether the UE is allowed to re-attempt the corresponding session management procedure for the same DNN in S1 mode after inter-system change.

NOTE1: In a PLMN, if the network includes this back-off timer value for 5GSM cause values other than #27 "missing or unknown DNN", then the UE is blocked from sending another 5GSM request for the same procedure for the same [PLMN, DNN, S-NSSAI], [PLMN, DNN, no S-NSSAI], [PLMN, no DNN, S-NSSAI], or [PLMN, no DNN, no S-NSSAI] combination for the specified duration. If the network includes this back-off timer value for 5GSM cause value #27 "missing or unknown DNN", then the UE is blocked from sending another 5GSM request for the same procedure for the same [PLMN, DNN], or [PLMN, no DNN] combination for the specified duration. In an SNPN, if the network includes this back-off timer value for 5GSM cause values other than #27 "missing or unknown DNN", then the UE is blocked from sending another 5GSM request for the same procedure for the same [SNPN, DNN, S-NSSAI], [SNPN, DNN, no S-NSSAI], [SNPN, no DNN, S-NSSAI], or [SNPN, no DNN, no S-NSSAI] combination for the specified duration if the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, and the UE is blocked from sending another 5GSM request for the same procedure for the same [SNPN, selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or selected PLMN subcription, DNN, S-NSSAI], [SNPN, selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or selected PLMN subcription, DNN, no S-NSSAI], [SNPN, selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or selected PLMN subcription, no DNN, S-NSSAI], or [SNPN, selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or selected PLMN subcription, no DNN, no S-NSSAI] combination for the specified duration if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder . If the network includes this back-off timer value for 5GSM cause value #27 "missing or unknown DNN", then the UE is blocked from sending another 5GSM request for the same procedure for the same [SNPN, DNN], or [SNPN, no DNN] combination for the specified duration if the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, and the UE is blocked from sending another 5GSM request for the same procedure for the same [SNPN, selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or selected PLMN subcription, DNN], or [SNPN, selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or selected PLMN subcription, no DNN] combination for the specified duration if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder. Therefore, the operator needs to exercise caution in determining the use of this timer value.

NOTE2: If the re-attempt indicator is not provided by the network, a UE registered in its HPLMN or in an EHPLMN can use the configured SM_RetryAtRATChange value specified in the NAS configuration MO or in the USIM NASCONFIG file to derive the re-attempt indicator as specified in subclauses6.4.1.4.3 and 6.4.2.4.3.

If re-attempt in S1 mode is allowed for 5GSM cause values other than #27 "missing or unknown DNN", the UE shall consider the back-off timer to be applicable only to the 5GS session management in N1 mode for the rejected 5GS session management procedure and the given [PLMN, DNN, S-NSSAI], [PLMN, DNN, no S-NSSAI], [PLMN, no DNN, S-NSSAI], or [PLMN, no DNN, no S-NSSAI] combination. If re-attempt in S1 mode is allowed for 5GSM cause value #27 "missing or unknown DNN", the UE shall consider the back-off timer to be applicable only to the 5GS session management in N1 mode for the rejected 5GS session management procedure and the given [PLMN, DNN], or [PLMN, no DNN] combination.If re-attempt in S1 mode is not allowed, the UE shall consider the back-off timer to be applicable to both NAS protocols, i.e. applicable to the 5GS session management in N1 mode for the rejected 5GS session management procedure and to the EPS session management in S1 mode for the corresponding session management procedure and the given [PLMN, DNN] or [PLMN, no DNN] combination.

NOTE3: In the present subclause the terms DNN and APN are referring to the same parameter.

In a PLMN, if the back-off timer was provided during the PDU session establishment procedure, the UE behaves as follows: for 5GSM cause values other than #27 "missing or unknown DNN", when the UE is registered in a HPLMN, the DNN and the S-NSSAI of the [PLMN, DNN, S-NSSAI] combination associated with the back-off timer is the DNN and the S-NSSAI provided by the UE when the PDU session is established. When the UE is registered in a VPLMN, the DNN and the S-NSSAI of the [PLMN, DNN, S-NSSAI] combination associated with the back-off timer is the DNN and the mapped S-NSSAI provided by the UE when the PDU session is established. For 5GSM cause value #27 "missing or unknown DNN", the DNN of the [PLMN, DNN] combination associated with the back-off timer is the DNN provided by the UE when the PDU session is established. If no DNN or no S-NSSAI was provided to the network during the PDU session establishment, then the back-off timer is associated with the [PLMN, DNN, no S-NSSAI], [PLMN, no DNN, S-NSSAI], or [PLMN, no DNN, no S-NSSAI] combination, dependent on which parameters were provided for 5GSM cause values other than #27 "missing or unknown DNN". If no DNN was provided to the network during the PDU session establishment, then the back-off timer is associated with the [PLMN, no DNN] combination for 5GSM cause value #27 "missing or unknown DNN". For this purpose, the UE shall memorize the DNN and the S-NSSAI provided to the network during the PDU session establishment.

In a PLMN, if the back-off timer was provided during the PDU session modification procedure, the UE behaves as follows: the DNN associated with the back-off timer is the DNN, including no DNN, provided by the UE when the PDU session is established. If an S-NSSAI was provided by the UE during the PDU session establishment, when the UE is registered in a HPLMN, then the S-NSSAI associated with the back-off timer is the S-NSSAI of the PDU session. If an S-NSSAI was provided by the UE during the PDU session establishment, when the UE is registered in a VPLMN, then the S-NSSAI associated with the back-off timer is the mapped S-NSSAI of the PDU session. If no S-NSSAI was provided by the UE during the PDU session establishment, then the back-off timer is associated with no S-NSSAI. For this purpose, the UE shall memorize the DNN and the S-NSSAI provided to the network during the PDU session establishment.

In a PLMN, the back-off timer associated with the [PLMN, no DNN, no S-NSSAI], or [PLMN, no DNN] combination will never be started due to any 5GSM procedure related to an emergency PDU session. If the back-off timer associated with the [PLMN, no DNN, no S-NSSAI], or [PLMN, no DNN] combination is running, it does not affect the ability of the UE to request an emergency PDU session.

In an SNPN, the back-off timer associated with the [SNPN, no DNN, no S-NSSAI], or [SNPN, no DNN] combination if the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, or the back-off timer associated with the [SNPN, selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or selected PLMN subscription, no DNN, no S-NSSAI], or [SNPN, selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or selected PLMN subscription, no DNN] combination if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, will never be started due to any 5GSM procedure related to an emergency PDU session. If the back-off timer associated with the [SNPN, no DNN, no S-NSSAI], or [SNPN, no DNN] combination if the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, or the back-off timer associated with the [SNPN, selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or selected PLMN subscription, no DNN, no S-NSSAI], or [SNPN, selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or selected PLMN subscription, no DNN] combination if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder is running, it does not affect the ability of the UE to request an emergency PDU session.

In a PLMN, the network may additionally indicate in the re-attempt indicator that a command to back-off is applicable not only for the PLMN in which the UE received the 5GS session management reject message, but for each PLMN included in the equivalent PLMN list at the time when the 5GS session management reject message was received.

In a PLMN, if the back-off timer is running or is deactivated for a given [PLMN, DNN, S-NSSAI], [PLMN, DNN, no S-NSSAI], [PLMN, no DNN, S-NSSAI], [PLMN, no DNN, no S-NSSAI] , [PLMN, DNN], or [PLMN, no DNN] combination, and the UE is a UE configured for high priority access in selected PLMN, then the UE is allowed to initiate 5GSM procedures for the [PLMN, DNN, S-NSSAI], [PLMN, DNN, no S-NSSAI], [PLMN, no DNN, S-NSSAI], [PLMN, no DNN, no S-NSSAI] , [PLMN, DNN], or [PLMN, no DNN] combination.

In an SNPN, if the back-off timer is running or is deactivated for a given [SNPN, DNN, S-NSSAI], [SNPN, DNN, no S-NSSAI], [SNPN, no DNN, S-NSSAI], [SNPN, no DNN, no S-NSSAI] , [SNPN, DNN], or [SNPN, no DNN] combination if the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, or the back-off timer is running or is deactivated for a given [SNPN, selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or selected PLMN subcription, DNN, S-NSSAI], [SNPN, selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or selected PLMN subcription, DNN, no S-NSSAI], [SNPN, selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or selected PLMN subcription, no DNN, S-NSSAI], [SNPN, selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or selected PLMN subcription, no DNN, no S-NSSAI] , [SNPN, selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or selected PLMN subcription, DNN], or [SNPN, selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or selected PLMN subcription, no DNN] combination if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, and the UE is a UE configured for high priority access in selected SNPN, then the UE is allowed to initiate 5GSM procedures for the [SNPN, DNN, S-NSSAI], [SNPN, DNN, no S-NSSAI], [SNPN, no DNN, S-NSSAI], [SNPN, no DNN, no S-NSSAI] , [SNPN, DNN], or [SNPN, no DNN] combination if the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, or the UE is allowed to initiate 5GSM procedures for the [SNPN, selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or selected PLMN subcription, DNN, S-NSSAI], [SNPN, selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or selected PLMN subcription, DNN, no S-NSSAI], [SNPN, selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or selected PLMN subcription, no DNN, S-NSSAI], [SNPN, selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or selected PLMN subcription, no DNN, no S-NSSAI] , [SNPN, selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or selected PLMN subcription, DNN], or [SNPN, selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or selected PLMN subcription, no DNN] combination if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder.

Neither the re-attempt indicator IE nor re-attempt indicator derivation shall be applicable in an SNPN.

6.2.13 Handling of Small data rate control

Small data rate control is applicable only to NB-N1 mode and WB-N1 mode.

Small data rate control controls the maximum number of uplink user data messages including uplink exception data reporting sent by the UE in a time interval for the PDU session in accordance with 3GPPTS23.501[8]. The UE shall limit the rate at which it generates uplink user data messages to comply with the small data rate control policy. The NAS shall provide the indicated rates to upper layers for enforcement. The indicated rates in a NAS procedure applies to the PDU session the NAS procedure corresponds to, and the indicated rates are valid until a new value is indicated or the PDU session is released.

If the UE indicates support for CIoT 5GS optimizations, the network may provide the small data rate control parameters to the UE and may provide the small data rate control parameters for exception data to the UE if and only if the small data rate control parameters is provided to the UE. Small data rate control parameters and small data rate control parameters for exception data can also be provided to the UE in S1 mode as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15].

If an allowed indication of additional exception reports is provided with the small data rate control parameters and:

- the additional small data rate control parameters for exception data is provided and the limit for additional rate for exception data reporting is not reached; or

- the additional small data rate control parameters for exception data is not provided,

the UE is allowed to send uplink exception reports even if the limit for the small data rate control has been reached.

During a PDU session release procedure, if the small data rate control was applied to the PDU session that is being released, the network may store the small data rate control status for the released PDU session as specified in 3GPPTS23.501[8].

If:

a) the UE indicates support for CIoT 5GS optimizations; and

b) the small data rate control status was stored for the PDU session and is still valid,

the network may provide the remaining small data rate control status as initial small data rate control parameters to the UE and initial small data rate control parameters for exception data to the UE during a subsequent PDU session establishment procedure.

If received during the establishment of a PDU session, the UE shall apply the initial small data rate control parameters and the initial small data rate control parameters for exception data for the duration of the validity period. When the validity period expires the small data rate control parameters and the small data rate control parameters for exception data shall be applied (see 3GPPTS23.501[8]).

NOTE1: The HPLMN can discard or delay user data that exceeds the limit provided for small data rate control.

Upon inter-system change from N1 mode to S1 mode, the UE shall store the current small data rate control status for PDU sessions to be transferred from N1 mode to S1 mode as specified in 3GPPTS23.501[8].

NOTE2: How long the UE stores the current small data rate control status is implementation specific.

Upon inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode, the UE shall use the stored small data rate control status, if any, to comply with the small data rate control policy for PDU sessions transferred from S1 mode to N1 mode as specified in 3GPPTS23.501[8], if the validity period of the stored small data rate control status has not expired.

6.2.14 Handling of Serving PLMN rate control

Serving PLMN rate control is applicable only for PDU sessions established for control plane CIoT 5GS optimization.

Serving PLMN rate control protect its AMF and the signalling radio bearers in the E-UTRA from the load generated by user data over control plane.

The SMF can inform the UE of any local serving PLMN rate control during the PDU session establishment procedure (see subclause6.4.1) or the PDU session modification procedure (see subclause6.4.2). If serving PLMN rate control is enabled, the SMF shall start the serving PLMN rate control for the PDU session when the first control plane user data is received over the PDU session.The UE shall limit the rate at which it generates uplink control plane user data to comply with the serving PLMN policy provided by the network. The indicated rate in a NAS procedure applies to the PDU session the NAS procedure corresponds to, and the indicated rate is valid until the PDU session is released.

Any Serving PLMN rate control information provided by the network to the UE is only applicable for the PLMN which provided this information. This serving PLMN rate control information shall be discarded when the UE successfully registers to another PLMN.

NOTE: The serving PLMN can discard or delay control plane user data that exceed the limit provided for Serving PLMN rate control.

6.2.15 Handling of Reliable Data Service

If the UE supports Reliable Data Service (see 3GPPTS23.501[8] and 3GPPTS24.250[14A]), the UE may request data transfer using Reliable Data Service for a PDU session in the Extended protocol configuration options IE during UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure (see subclause6.4.1).

The Reliable Data Service may only be used with PDU sessions for which the "Control Plane CIoT 5GS Optimisation" indicator is set or with PDU sessions using the control plane CIoT 5GS optimization when the AMF does not move such PDU sessions to the user plane.

The network shall inform the UE about the acceptance of UE's request for Reliable Data Service usage during the PDU session establishment procedure (see subclause6.4.1) in the Extended protocol configuration options IE.

If the network accepts the use of Reliable Data Service to transfer data for the specified PDU session, the UE shall use this PDU session exclusively for data transfer using Reliable Data Service; otherwise the UE shall not use this PDU session for data transfer using Reliable Data Service.

6.2.16 Handling of header compression for control plane CIoT optimizations

The UE and the SMF may use:

- IP header compression for PDU sessions of "IPv4", "IPv6" or "IPv4v6" PDU session type; and

- Ethernet header compression for PDU sessions of "Ethernet" PDU session type.

Both the UE and the AMF indicate whether header compression for control plane CIoT 5GS optimization is supported during registration procedures (see subclause5.5.1). If both the UE and the network support header compression, the header compression configuration for each PDU session is negotiated during the PDU session establishment procedure and PDU session modification procedure as specified in subclauses6.3.2, 6.4.1 and 6.4.2.

For IP header compression, ROHC protocol specified in IETFRFC5795[39B] is used. The IP header compression configuration used for IP header compression is (re-)negotiated between the UE and the SMF using the IP header compression configuration IE as specified in subclauses6.3.2.2, 6.4.1.2, 6.4.1.3 and 6.4.2.2, respectively.

For Ethernet header compression, Ethernet Header Compression (EHC) protocol specified in 3GPP TS 38.323 [29] is used. The Ethernet header compression configuration used for Ethernet header compression is (re-)negotiated between the UE and the SMF using the Ethernet header compression configuration IE as specified in subclauses6.3.2.2, 6.4.1.2, 6.4.1.3 and 6.4.2.2, respectively.

6.2.17 Handling of edge computing enhancements

EAS discovery, EAS rediscovery and ECS address provisioning provide enhanced edge computing support in 5GS (see 3GPPTS23.548[10A]).

If the network supports the session breakout connectivity model or distributed anchor connectivity model to enable edge computing enhancements and the UE generated DNS message is to be handled by an edge application server discovery function (EASDF) for EAS discovery as specified in 3GPPTS23.548[10A], the SMF selects the EASDF and it provides its IP address to the UE as the DNS server to be used for the PDU session in the Extended protocol configuration options IE during the UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure as described in subclause6.4.1.3.

NOTE1: EASDF selection is outside the scope of the present document.

If the network supports the session breakout connectivity model to enable edge computing enhancements and the UE generated DNS message is to be handled by a local DNS server for EAS discovery as specified in 3GPPTS23.548[10A], the SMF selects the local DNS server, obtains its IP address and can provide the IP address of the local DNS server to the UE as the DNS server to be used for the PDU session in the Extended protocol configuration options IE during the UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure or the network-requested PDU session modification procedure as described in subclauses6.4.1.3 and 6.3.2.2, respectively.

NOTE2: Local DNS server selection and the acquisition of its IP address is outside the scope of the present document.

If the UE supports EAS rediscovery and the SMF decides to trigger the EAS rediscovery as specified in 3GPPTS23.548[10A], the SMF initiates a network-requested PDU session modification procedure to provide the EAS rediscovery information to the UE as described in subclauses6.3.2.2. Upon receipt of the EAS rediscovery information, the UE provides the received information to the upper layers.

NOTE3: The upper layers of the UE uses the EAS rediscovery information to trigger the EAS discovery procedure to get the new EAS information as specified in 3GPPTS23.548[10A].

If the UE supports ECS address provisioning over NAS as specified in 3GPPTS23.548[10A], the UE indicates its support of ECS configuration information provisioning over NAS in the Extended protocol configuration options IE during the UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure or the UE-requested PDU session modification procedure as described in subclauses6.4.1.2 and 6.4.2.2, respectively.

If the UE indicated support of ECS configuration information address provisioning over NAS, the SMF can provide the ECS configuration information in the Extended protocol configuration options IE during the network-requested PDU session modification procedure, UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure or the UE-requested PDU session modification procedure as described in subclauses6.3.2.2, 6.4.1.3 and 6.4.2.3, respectively.

NOTE4: The SMF can obtain the ECS configuration information based on the local configuration, the UE's location, and/or UE's subscription information.

If the UE supports the edge DNS client (EDC) as specified in 3GPPTS23.548[10A], the UE indicates its support of EDC in the Extended protocol configuration options IE during the UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure as described in subclause6.4.1.2 or the UE-requested PDU session modification procedure as described in subclause6.4.2.2.

If the UE indicates support of EDC, the SMF can indicate in the Extended protocol configuration options IE during the UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure as described in subclause6.4.1.3 or the network-requested PDU session modification procedure as described in subclause6.3.2.2, that the network allows the use of EDC for the applications which are mapped onto the PDU session and explicitly requested the use of EDC, or that the network requires the use of EDC for all applications mapped onto the PDU session.

6.2.18 Support of redundant PDU sessions

The 5GSM sublayer may support establishment of redundant PDU sessions (see clause5.33.2 of 3GPPTS23.501[8]).

In order to establish a set of two redundant PDU sessions, a UE can include a PDU session pair ID, an RSN, or both in a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message for each of the two redundant PDU sessions (see subclause6.4.1.2). The UE can set the PDU session pair ID, the RSN, or both according to URSP or UE local configuration (see 3GPPTS24.526[19]).

An SMF receiving a PDU session pair ID, an RSN, or both via a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message operates as specified in clause5.33.2 of 3GPPTS23.501[8]. In addition, an SMF can handle two PDU sessions as redundant even if the UE provides neither a PDU session pair ID nor an RSN in a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message for each of the PDU sessions (see clause5.33.2 of 3GPPTS23.501[8]).

6.3 Network-requested 5GSM procedures

6.3.1 PDU session authentication and authorization procedure

6.3.1.1 General

The purpose of the PDU session authentication and authorization procedure is to enable the DN:

a) to authenticate the upper layers of the UE, when establishing the PDU session;

b) to authorize the upper layers of the UE, when establishing the PDU session;

c) both of the above;

d) to re-authenticate the upper layers of the UE after establishment of the PDU session; or

e) to authenticate the upper layers of the 5G ProSe layer-3 remote UE, upon receipt of the REMOTE UE REPORT message.

The PDU session authentication and authorization procedure can be performed only during or after the UE-requested PDU session procedure establishing a non-emergency PDU session. The PDU session authentication and authorization procedure shall not be performed during or after the UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure establishing an emergency PDU session.

The upper layers store the association between a DNN and corresponding credentials, if any, for the PDU session authentication and authorization.

If the UE is registered for onboarding services in SNPN the SMF may initiate the PDU session authentication and authorization procedure based on local policy with a DCS as specified in 3GPPTS33.501[24] clauseI.9.2.4.1 or a DNAAA server as specified in 3GPPTS33.501[24] clauseI.9.2.4.2.

If the UE is registered for onboarding services in SNPN and the network initiates the PDU session authentication and authorization procedure, the UE shall use the default UE credentials for secondary authentication for the PDU session authentication and authorization procedure.

The network authenticates the UE using the Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP) as specified in IETFRFC3748[34].

EAP has defined four types of EAP messages:

a) an EAP-request message;

b) an EAP-response message;

c) an EAP-success message; and

d) an EAP-failure message.

The EAP-request message is transported from the network to the UE using the PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message of the PDU EAP message reliable transport procedure.

The EAP-response message to the EAP-request message is transported from the UE to the network using the PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMPLETE message of the PDU EAP message reliable transport procedure.

If the PDU session authentication and authorization procedure is performed during the UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure:

a) and the DN authentication of the UE completes successfully, the EAP-success message is transported from the network to the UE as part of the UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message.

b) and the DN authentication of the UE completes unsuccessfully, the EAP-failure message is transported from the network to the UE as part of the UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REJECT message.

If the PDU session authentication and authorization procedure is performed after the UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure:

a) and the DN authentication of the UE completes successfully, the EAP-success message is transported from the network to the UE using the PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION RESULT message of the PDU EAP result message transport procedure.

b) and the DN authentication of the UE completes unsuccessfully, the EAP-failure message is transported from the network to the UE using the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message of the network-requested PDU session release procedure.

There can be several rounds of exchange of an EAP-request message and a related EAP-response message for the DN to complete the authentication and authorization of the request for a PDU session (see example in figure6.3.1.1).

The SMF shall set the authenticator retransmission timer specified in IETFRFC3748[34] subclause4.3 to infinite value.

NOTE: The PDU session authentication and authorization procedure provides a reliable transport of EAP messages and therefore retransmissions at the EAP layer of the SMF do not occur.



Figure6.3.1.1: PDU session authentication and authorization procedure

6.3.1.2 PDU EAP message reliable transport procedure

6.3.1.2.1 PDU EAP message reliable transport procedure initiation

In order to initiate the PDU EAP message reliable transport procedure, the SMF shall create a PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message.

The SMF shall set the PTI IE of the PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message to "No procedure transaction identity assigned".

The SMF shall set the EAP message IE of the PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message to the EAP-request message provided by the DN or generated locally.

The SMF shall set the Remote UE handling information IE of the PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message to the remote user identify if received in the Remote UE context connected IE in the REMOTE UE REPORT message.

The SMF shall send the PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message, and the SMF shall start timer T3590 (see example in figure6.3.1.1).

Upon receipt of the PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message, if the UE provided a DNN during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall stop timer T3396, if it is running for the DNN provided by the UE. If the UE did not provide a DNN during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall stop the timer T3396 associated with no DNN if it is running.

Upon receipt of the PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message, if the UE provided an S-NSSAI and a DNN during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall stop timer T3584, if it is running for the [S-NSSAI of the PDU session, DNN] combination. If the UE provided a DNN but did not provide an S-NSSAI during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall stop timer T3584, if it is running for the same [no S-NSSAI, DNN] combination provided by the UE. If the UE provided an S-NSSAI but did not provide a DNN during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall stop timer T3584, if it is running for the same [S-NSSAI, no DNN] combination provided by the UE. If the UE provided neither a DNN nor an S-NSSAI during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall stop timer T3584, if it is running for the same [no S-NSSAI, no DNN] combination provided by the UE. The timer T3584 to be stopped includes the timer T3584 applied for all the PLMNs, if running, and the timer T3584 applied for the registered PLMN, if running.

Upon receipt of the PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message, if the UE provided an S-NSSAI during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall stop timer T3585, if it is running for the S-NSSAI of the PDU session. If the UE did not provide an S-NSSAI during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall stop the timer T3585 associated with no S-NSSAI if it is running. The timer T3585 to be stopped includes the timer T3585 applied for all the PLMNs, if running, and the timer T3585 applied for the registered PLMN, if running.

NOTE1: Upon receipt of the PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message for a PDU session, if the UE provided a DNN (or no DNN) and an S-NSSAI (or no S-NSSAI) when the PDU session is established, timer T3396 associated with the DNN (or no DNN, if no DNN was provided by the UE) is running, and timer T3584 associated with the DNN (or no DNN, if no DNN was provided by the UE) and the S-NSSAI (or no S-NSSAI, if no S-NSSAI was provided by the UE) is running, then the UE stops both the timer T3396 and the timer T3584.

NOTE2: Upon receipt of the PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message for a PDU session, if the UE provided a DNN (or no DNN) and an S-NSSAI (or no S-NSSAI) when the PDU session is established, timer T3585 associated with the S-NSSAI (or no S-NSSAI, if no S-NSSAI was provided by the UE) is running, and timer T3584 associated with the DNN (or no DNN, if no DNN was provided by the UE) and the S-NSSAI (or no S-NSSAI, if no S-NSSAI was provided by the UE) is running, then the UE stops both the timer T3585 and the timer T3584.

Upon receipt of a PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message and a PDU session ID, using the NAS transport procedure as specified in subclause5.4.5, the UE passes to the upper layers the EAP message received in the EAP message IE of the PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message. Apart from this action and the stopping of timers T3396, T3584 and T3485 (if running), the authentication and authorization procedure initiated by the DN is transparent to the 5GSM layer of the UE.

Upon receipt of a PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message including the Remote UE handling information IE, the UE shall pass to the upper layer as defined in 3GPPTS24.554[19E] the EAP message received in the EAP message IE of the PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message.

6.3.1.2.2 PDU EAP message reliable transport procedure accepted by the UE

The UE shall create a PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMPLETE message when:

a) the upper layers provide an EAP-response message responding to the received EAP-request message; or

b) the UE receives an EAP message from the 5G ProSe layer-3 remote UE as defined in 3GPPTS24.554[19E].

The UE shall set the EAP message IE of the PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMPLETE message to the EAP-response message.

The UE shall set the Remote UE handling information IE of the PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMPLETE message to the remote user identity from which the EAP message is received if the EAP message is received from the 5G ProSe layer-3 remote UE.

The UE shall transport the PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMPLETE message and the PDU session ID, using the NAS transport procedure as specified in subclause5.4.5. Apart from this action, the authentication and authorization procedure initiated by the DN is transparent to the 5GSM layer of the UE.

Upon receipt of a PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMPLETE message, the SMF shall stop timer T3590 and provides the EAP message received in the EAP message IE of the PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMPLETE message to the DN or handles it locally.

6.3.1.2.3 Abnormal cases on the network side

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a) T3590 expired.

 The SMF shall, on the first expiry of the timer T3590, retransmit the PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message and shall reset and start timer T3590. This retransmission is repeated four times, i.e. on the fifth expiry of timer T3590, the SMF shall abort the procedure.

b) Collision of UE-requested PDU session release procedure and a PDU session authentication and authorization procedure.

 When the SMF receives a PDU SESSION RELEASE REQUEST message during the PDU session authentication and authorization procedure, and the PDU session indicated in the PDU SESSION RELEASE REQUEST message is the PDU session that the SMF had requested to authenticate, the SMF shall abort the PDU session authentication and authorization procedure and proceed with the UE-requested PDU session release procedure.

6.3.1.2.4 Abnormal cases in the UE

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a) PDU session inactive for the received PDU session ID.

 If the PDU session ID in the PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message belongs to any PDU session in state PDU SESSION INACTIVE in the UE, the UE shall send a 5GSM STATUS message with the 5GSM cause IE set to #43 "Invalid PDU session identity".

b) Collision of UE-requested PDU session release procedure and a PDU session authentication and authorization procedure.

 When the UE receives a PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message during the UE-requested PDU session release procedure, and the PDU session indicated in PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message is the PDU session that the UE had requested to release, the UE shall ignore the PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message and proceed with the UE-requested PDU session release procedure.

6.3.1.3 PDU EAP result message transport procedure

6.3.1.3.1 PDU EAP result message transport procedure initiation

PDU EAP result message transport procedure is initiated by the SMF if the PDU session authentication and authorization procedure is performed after the PDU session is established and the DN authentication of the UE completes successfully.

In order to initiate the PDU EAP result message transport procedure, the SMF shall create a PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION RESULT message.

The SMF shall set the PTI IE of the PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION RESULT message to "No procedure transaction identity assigned".

The SMF shall set the EAP message IE of the PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION RESULT message to the EAP-success message provided by the DN.

The SMF shall send the PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION RESULT message.

Upon receipt of a PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION RESULT message and a PDU session ID, using the NAS transport procedure as specified in subclause5.4.5, the UE passes to the upper layers the EAP message received in the EAP message IE of the PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION RESULT message. Apart from this action, the authentication and authorization procedure initiated by the DN is transparent to the 5GSM layer of the UE.

6.3.1.3.2 Abnormal cases in the UE

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a) PDU session inactive for the received PDU session ID.

 If the PDU session ID in the PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION RESULT message belongs to any PDU session in state PDU SESSION INACTIVE in the UE, the UE shall send a 5GSM STATUS message with the 5GSM cause IE set to #43 "Invalid PDU session identity".

b) Collision of UE-requested PDU session release procedure and a PDU EAP result message transport procedure.

 When the UE receives a PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION RESULT message during the UE-requested PDU session release procedure, and the PDU session indicated in PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION RESULT  message is the PDU session that the UE had requested to release, the UE shall ignore the PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION RESULT message and proceed with the UE-requested PDU session release procedure.

6.3.1A Service-level authentication and authorization procedure

6.3.1A.1 General

The purpose of the service-level authentication and authorization (service-level-AA) procedure is to enable the DN using NEF services for authentication:

a) to authenticate the upper layers of the UE, when establishing the PDU session;

b) to authorize the upper layers of the UE, when establishing the PDU session;

c) both of the above; or

d) to re-authenticate the upper layers of the UE after establishment of the PDU session.

The service-level authentication and authorization procedure is used for UUAA as specified in TS23.256[6AB].

NOTE1: The authentication protocol for UUAA is out of scope of 3GPP in this release of specification.

The service-level authentication and authorization procedure can be performed only during or after the UE-requested PDU session procedure establishing a non-emergency PDU session. The service-level authentication and authorization procedure shall not be performed during or after the UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure establishing an emergency PDU session.

If the service-level authentication and authorization procedure is performed during the UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure:

a) and the service-level-AA procedure of the UE completes successfully, the service-level-AA response is transported from the network to the UE as a part of the UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message; or

b) and the service-level-AA procedure of the UE completes unsuccessfully, the service-level-AA response is transported from the network to the UE as a part of the UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REJECT message.

NOTE2: If the SMF receives the HTTP code set to "4xx" or "5xx" as specified in 3GPPTS29.500[20AA] or the SMF detects a UUAA-SM failure as specified in 3GPPTS29.256[21B], then the SMF considers that the UUAA-SM procedure has completed unsuccessfully.

If the service-level authentication and authorization procedure is performed for the established PDU session with re-authentication purpose:

a) and the service-level-AA procedure of the UE completes successfully, the service-level-AA response is transported from the network to the UE as a part of the network-requested PDU session modification procedure in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message; or

b) and the service-level-AA procedure of the UE completes unsuccessfully, the service-level-AA response is transported from the network to the UE as a part of the network-requested PDU session release procedure in the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message.

There can be several rounds of exchange of a service-level-AA payload for the service to complete the service-level authentication and authorization of the request for a PDU session (see example in figure6.3.1A.1-1).

If the UE receives the service-level-AA response in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message or the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REJECT message, the UE passes it to the upper layer.



Figure6.3.1A.1-1: Service-level authentication and authorization procedure

6.3.1A.2 Service-level authentication and authorization procedure initiation

In order to initiate the service-level authentication and authorization procedure, the SMF shall create a SERVICE-LEVEL AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message.

The SMF shall set the PTI IE of the SERVICE-LEVEL AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message to "No procedure transaction identity assigned".

The SMF shall set the service-level-AA payload in the Service-level-AA container IE of the SERVICE-LEVEL AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message to the service-level-AA payload provided by the DN via the NEF.

NOTE: In case of UUAA, the service-level-AA payload is provided by the DN via the UAS-NF.

The SMF shall send the SERVICE-LEVEL AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message, and the SMF shall start timer T3xyz (see example in figure6.3.1A.1-1).

Editor's Note: T3xyz will be further specified.

Upon receipt of a SERVICE-LEVEL AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message and a PDU session ID, using the NAS transport procedure as specified in subclause5.4.5, the UE passes to the upper layers the service-level-AA payload received in the Service-level-AA container IE of the SERVICE-LEVEL AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message. Apart from this action, the service-level authentication and authorization procedure initiated by the DN is transparent to the 5GSM layer of the UE.

6.3.1A.3 Service-level authentication and authorization procedure accepted by the UE

When the upper layers provide a service-level-AA payload, the UE shall create a SERVICE-LEVEL AUTHENTICATION COMPLETE message and set the service-level-AA payload of the Service-level-AA container IE to the service-level-AA payload received from the upper layers.

The UE shall transport the SERVICE-LEVEL AUTHENTICATION COMPLETE message and the PDU session ID, using the NAS transport procedure as specified in subclause5.4.5. Apart from this action, the service-level authentication and authorization procedure initiated by the DN is transparent to the 5GSM layer of the UE.

Upon receipt of a SERVICE-LEVEL AUTHENTICATION COMPLETE message, the SMF shall stop timer T3594 and provides the service-level-AA payload received in the Service-level-AA container IE of the SERVICE-LEVEL AUTHENTICATION COMPLETE message to the DN.

6.3.1A.4 Abnormal cases on the network side

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a) Expiry of timer T3594.

 On the first expiry of the timer T3594, the SMF shall resend the SERVICE-LEVEL AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message and shall reset and restart timer T3594. This retransmission is repeated four times, i.e., on the fifth expiry of timer T3594, the SMF shall abort the procedure and send PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REJECT message with the 5GSM cause #29 "user authentication or authorization failed" as specified in subclause6.4.1.4.1.

6.3.1A.5 Abnormal cases in the UE

The following abnormal case can be identified:

a) Collision of UE-requested PDU session release procedure and a service-level authentication and authorization procedure.

 When the UE receives a SERVICE-LEVEL AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message during the UE-requested PDU session release procedure, and the PDU session indicated in SERVICE-LEVEL AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message is the PDU session that the UE has requested to release, the UE shall ignore the SERVICE-LEVEL AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message and proceed with the UE-requested PDU session release procedure.

6.3.2 Network-requested PDU session modification procedure

6.3.2.1 General

The purpose of the network-requested PDU session modification procedure is to enable the network to modify a PDU session, re-negotiate header compression configuration associated to a PDU session, convey a port management information container, to trigger EAS rediscovery, provide updated DNS server address(es) due to the newly selected local DNS server or the newly selected EASDF, provide updated ECS configuration information, remove joined UE from one or more MBS multicast sessions associated with a PDU session, update ATSSS parameters (e.g. ATSSS rules), update the MBS service area of MBS multicast session that the UE has joined or to inform about the result of service-level AA procedure or C2 authorization for UAS services.

6.3.2.2 Network-requested PDU session modification procedure initiation

In order to initiate the network-requested PDU session modification procedure, the SMF shall create a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message.

If the authorized QoS rules of the PDU session is modified or is marked as to be synchronised with the UE, the SMF shall set the Authorized QoS rules IE of the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message to the authorized QoS rules of the PDU session. The SMF shall ensure that the number of the packet filters used in the authorized QoS rules of the PDU Session does not exceed the maximum number of packet filters supported by the UE for the PDU session. The SMF may bind service data flows for which the UE has requested traffic segregation to a dedicated QoS flow for the PDU session, if possible. Otherwise the SMF may bind the service data flows to an existing QoS flow. The SMF shall use only one dedicated QoS flow for traffic segregation. If the UE has requested traffic segregation for multiple service data flows with different QoS handling, the SMF shall bind all these service data flows to a single QoS flow. If the SMF allows traffic segregation for service data flows in a QoS rule, then the SMF shall create a new authorized QoS rule for these service data flows and shall delete packet filters corresponding to these service data flows from the other authorized QoS rules.

If the authorized QoS flow descriptions of the PDU session is modified or is marked as to be synchronised with the UE, the SMF shall set the Authorized QoS flow descriptions IE of the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message to the authorized QoS flow descriptions of the PDU session.

If SMF creates a new authorized QoS rule for a new QoS flow, then SMF shall include the authorized QoS flow description for that QoS flow in the Authorized QoS flow descriptions IE of the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message, if:

a) the newly created authorized QoS rules is for a new GBR QoS flow;

b) the QFI of the new QoS flow is not the same as the 5QI of the QoS flow identified by the QFI;

c) the new QoS flow can be mapped to an EPS bearer as specified in subclause4.11.1 of 3GPPTS23.502[9]; or

d) the new QoS flow is established for the PDU session used for relaying, as specified in subclause5.6.2.1 of 3GPPTS23.304[6E].

NOTE0: In cases other than above listed cases, it is up to the SMF implementation to include the authorized QoS flow description of the new QoS flow for the new authorized QoS rule in the Authorized QoS flow descriptions IE of the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message.

If the session-AMBR of the PDU session is modified, the SMF shall set the selected Session-AMBR IE of the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message to the session-AMBR of the PDU session.

If interworking with EPS is supported for the PDU session and if the mapped EPS bearer contexts of the PDU session is modified, the SMF shall set the Mapped EPS bearer contexts IE of the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message to the mapped EPS bearer contexts of the PDU session. If the association between a QoS flow and the mapped EPS bearer context is changed, the SMF shall set the EPS bearer identity parameter in Authorized QoS flow descriptions IE of the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message to the new EPS bearer identity associated with the QoS flow.

If the network-requested PDU session modification procedure is triggered by a UE-requested PDU session modification procedure and the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message includes a 5GSM capability IE, the SMF shall:

a) if the RQoS bit is set to:

1) "Reflective QoS supported", consider that the UE supports reflective QoS for this PDU session; or

2) "Reflective QoS not supported", consider that the UE does not support reflective QoS for this PDU session; and;

b) if the MH6-PDU bit is set to:

1) "Multi-homed IPv6 PDU session supported", consider that this PDU session is supported to use multiple IPv6 prefixes; or

2) "Multi-homed IPv6 PDU session not supported", consider that this PDU session is not supported to use multiple IPv6 prefixes.

If the SMF considers that reflective QoS is supported for QoS flows belonging to this PDU session, the SMF may include the RQ timer IE set to an RQ timer value in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message.

If a port management information container needs to be delivered (see 3GPPTS23.501[8] and 3GPPTS23.502[9]) and the UE has set the TPMIC bit to "Transport of port management information container supported" in the 5GSM capability IE, the SMF shall include a Port management information container IE in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message.

For a PDN connection established when in S1 mode, upon the first inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode, if the network-requested PDU session modification procedure is triggered by a UE-requested PDU session modification procedure, the PDU session type is "IPv4", "IPv6", "IPv4v6" or "Ethernet" and the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message includes a Maximum number of supported packet filters IE, the SMF shall consider this number as the maximum number of packet filters that can be supported by the UE for this PDU session. Otherwise the SMF considers that the UE supports 16 packet filters for this PDU session.

For a PDN connection established when in S1 mode, upon the first inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode, if the network-requested PDU session modification procedure is triggered by a UE-requested PDU session modification procedure, the SMF shall consider that the maximum data rate per UE for user-plane integrity protection supported by the UE for uplink and the maximum data rate per UE for user-plane integrity protection supported by the UE for downlink are valid for the lifetime of the PDU session.

For a PDN connection established when in S1 mode, upon the first inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode, if the network-requested PDU session modification procedure is triggered by a UE-requested PDU session modification procedure and the SMF determines, based on local policies or configurations in the SMF and the Always-on PDU session requested IE in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message (if available), that either:

a) the requested PDU session needs to be an always-on PDU session, the SMF shall include the Always-on PDU session indication IE in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message and shall set the value to "Always-on PDU session required"; or

b) the requested PDU session shall not be an always-on PDU session and:

1) if the UE included the Always-on PDU session requested IE, the SMF shall include the Always-on PDU session indication IE in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message and shall set the value to "Always-on PDU session not allowed"; or

2) if the UE did not include the Always-on PDU session requested IE, the SMF shall not include the Always-on PDU session indication IE in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message.

For a PDN connection established when in S1 mode, upon the first inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode, if the network-requested PDU session modification procedure is triggered by a UE-requested PDU session modification procedure, the UE supports EDC and the network allows the use of EDC, then the SMF shall include the Extended protocol configuration options IE in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message with the EDC usage allowed indicator.

For a PDN connection established when in S1 mode, upon the first inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode, if the network-requested PDU session modification procedure is triggered by a UE-requested PDU session modification procedure, the UE supports EDC and the network requires the use of EDC, then the SMF shall include the Extended protocol configuration options IE in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message with the EDC usage required indicator.

If a QoS flow for URLLC is created in a PDU session and the SMF has not provided the Always-on PDU session indication IE with the value set to "Always-on PDU session required" in the UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure or a network-requested PDU session modification procedure for the PDU session, the SMF shall include the Always-on PDU session indication IE in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message and shall set the value to "Always-on PDU session required".

If the value of the RQ timer is set to "deactivated" or has a value of zero, the UE considers that RQoS is not applied for this PDU session and remove the derived QoS rule(s) associated with the PDU session, if any.

If the network-requested PDU session modification procedure is triggered by a UE-requested PDU session modification procedure, the SMF shall set the PTI IE of the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message to the PTI of the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message received as part of the UE-requested PDU session modification procedure.

If the network-requested PDU session modification procedure is triggered by a UE-requested PDU session modification procedure and the UE has included the Requested MBS container IE in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with the MBS operation set to "Join MBS session", the SMF:

a) shall include the TMGI for the MBS session IDs that the UE is allowed to join, if any, in the Received MBS container IE, shall set the MBS decision to "MBS join is accepted" for each of those Received MBS information, may include the MBS start time to indicate the time when the MBS session starts, and shall include the MBS security container in each of those Received MBS information if security protection is applied for that MBS session, and shall use separate QoS flows dedicated for multicast by including the Authorized QoS flow descriptions IE if no separate QoS flows dedicated for multicast exist or if the SMF wants to establish new QoS flows dedicated for multicast;

NOTE1: The network determines whether security protection applies or not for the MBS session as specified in 3GPPTS33.501.

b) shall include the TMGI for MBS session IDs that the UE is rejected to join, if any, in the Received MBS container IE, shall set the MBS decision to "MBS join is rejected" for each of those Received MBS information, shall set the Rejection cause for each of those Received MBS information with the reason of rejection and, if the Rejection cause is set to "MBS session has not started or will not start soon", may include an MBS back-off timer value; and

c) may include in the Received MBS container IE the MBS service area for each MBS session and include in it the MBS TAI list, the NR CGI list or both, that identify the service area(s) for the local MBS service;

NOTE2: For an MBS multicast session that has multiple MBS service areas, the MBS service areas are indicated to the UE using MBS service announcement as described in 3GPPTS23.247[53], which is out of scope of this specification.

in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message. If the UE has set the Type of MBS session ID to "Source specific IP multicast address" in the Requested MBS container IE for certain MBS session(s) in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message, the SMF shall include the Source IP address information and Destination IP address information in the Received MBS information together with the TMGI for each of those MBS sessions.

NOTE3: Including the Source IP address information and Destination IP address information in the Received MBS information in that case is to allow the UE to perform the mapping between the requested MBS session ID and the provided TMGI.

NOTE4: In SNPN, TMGI is used together with NID to identify an MBS Session.

If:

a) the SMF wants to remove joined UE from one or more MBS sessions; or

b) the network-requested PDU session modification procedure is triggered by a UE-requested PDU session modification procedure and the UE has included the Requested MBS container IE in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with the MBS operation set to "Leave MBS session",

the SMF shall include the MBS session IDs that the UE is removed from, if any, in the Received MBS container IE in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message and shall set the MBS decision to "Remove UE from MBS session" for each of those Received MBS information. The SMF may include the updated MBS service area in each of the Received MBS information, if any. The SMF may delete the QoS flows associated for the multicast by including the Authorized QoS flow descriptions IE in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message. If the UE is removed from MBS session due to the MBS session release, the SMF shall set the Rejection cause to "MBS session is released". The SMF shall include the Rejection cause for each of the Received MBS information, if any, and set its value with the reason of removing the UE from the corresponding MBS session.

NOTE5: based on operator's policy, e.g. after a locally configured time period, the SMF is allowed to trigger the removal of joined UE from an MBS session when the UE moves outside all the MBS service area(s) of that MBS session.

If the SMF wants to update the MBS service area of an MBS session that the UE has joined, the SMF shall include the corresponding MBS session ID and the updated MBS service area in the Received MBS container IE in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message, and shall set the MBS decision to "MBS service area update" in the Received MBS information.

NOTE6: The MBS service area of an MBS multicast session is also allowed to be updated to the UE using the MBS service announcement as described in 3GPPTS23.247[53], which is out of scope of this specification.

If the network needs to update ATSSS parameters (see subclause5.2.4 of 3GPPTS24.193[13B]), the SMF shall include the ATSSS container IE with the updates of ATSSS parameters in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message.

If the network-requested PDU session modification procedure is not triggered by a UE-requested PDU session modification procedure, the SMF shall set the PTI IE of the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message to "No procedure transaction identity assigned".

If the selected SSC mode of the PDU session is "SSC mode 3" and the SMF requests the relocation of SSC mode 3 PDU session anchor with multiple PDU sessions as specified in 3GPPTS23.502[9], the SMF shall include 5GSM cause #39"reactivation requested" , in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message, and may include the PDU session address lifetime in a PDU session address lifetime parameter in the Extended protocol configuration options IE of the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message.

The SMF shall send the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message, and the SMF shall start timer T3591 (see example in figure6.3.2.2.1).

NOTE7: If the SMF requests the relocation of SSC mode 3 PDU session anchor with multiple PDU sessions as specified in 3GPPTS23.502[9], the reallocation requested indication indicating whether the SMF is to be reallocated or the SMF is to be reused is provided to the AMF.

If the control plane CIoT 5GS optimization is enabled for a PDU session and the IP header compression configuration IE was included in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message or the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message, and the SMF supports control plane CIoT 5GS optimization and IP header compression for control plane CIoT 5GS optimization, the SMF may include the IP header compression configuration IE in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message to re-negotiate IP header compression configuration associated to the PDU session.

If the control plane CIoT 5GS optimization is enabled for a PDU session and the Ethernet header compression configuration IE was included in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message or the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message, and the SMF supports control plane CIoT 5GS optimization and Ethernet header compression for control plane CIoT 5GS optimization, the SMF may include the Ethernet header compression configuration IE in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message to re-configure Ethernet header compression configuration associated with the PDU session.

If the network-requested PDU session modification procedure is associated with C2 authorization procedure, the SMF shall send the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message by including the Service-level-AA container IE containing:

a) the service-level-AA response with the value of C2AR field set to the "C2 authorization was successful";

b) if the C2 authorization payload is provided from the UAS-NF, the service-level-AA payload with the value set to the C2 authorization payload and the service-level-AA payload type with the value set to "C2 authorization payload"; and

c) if the CAA-level UAV ID is provided from the UAS-NF, the service-level device ID set to the CAA-level UAV ID.

NOTE8: The C2 authorization payload in the service-level-AA payload can include one or both of the C2 session security information and C2 pairing information.

If the service-level-AA procedure is triggered for the established PDU session for UAS services with re-authentication purpose, and the SMF is provided by the UAS-NF with the successful UUAA-SM result, the SMF shall transmit a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message to the UE, where the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message shall include the Service-level-AA container IE containing:

a) the service-level-AA response with the value of SLAR field set to "Service level authentication and authorization was successful";

b) if received the CAA-level UAV ID from the UAS-NF, the service-level device ID with the value set to the CAA-level UAV ID; and

c) if received the UUAA payload from the UAS-NF, the service-level-AA payload with the value set to the UUAA payload.

If the SMF needs to provide new ECS configuration information to the UE and the UE has indicated support for ECS configuration information provisioning in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message or the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message, then the SMF may include the Extended protocol configuration options IE in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message with: 

- at least one of ECS IPv4 Address(es), ECS IPv6 Address(es), ECS FQDN(s);

- at least one associated ECSP identifier;and

- optionally, spatial validity conditions associated with the ECS address; 

NOTE9: The IP address(es) and/or FQDN(s) are associated with the ECSP identifier and replace previously provided ECS configuration information associated with the same ECSP identifier, if any.

If the SMF needs to provide DNS server address(es) to the UE and the UE has provided the DNS server IPv4 address request, the DNS server IPv6 address request or both of them, in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message or a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message, then the SMF shall include the Extended protocol configuration options IE in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message with one or more DNS server IPv4 address(es), one or more DNS server IPv6 address(es) or both of them.

If the SMF needs to trigger EAS rediscovery and the UE has indicated support of the EAS rediscovery in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message or the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message, then the SMF shall include the Extended protocol configuration options IE in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message:

a) with the EAS rediscovery indication without indicated impact; or

b) with the following:

1) one or more EAS rediscovery indication(s) with impacted EAS IPv4 address range, if the UE supports EAS rediscovery indication(s) with impacted EAS IPv4 address range;

2) one or more EAS rediscovery indication(s) with impacted EAS IPv6 address range, if the UE supports EAS rediscovery indication(s) with impacted EAS IPv6 address range;

3) one or more EAS rediscovery indication(s) with impacted EAS FQDN, if the UE supports EAS rediscovery indication(s) with impacted EAS FQDN; or

4) any combination of the above.

When UE has requested P-CSCF IPv6 address or P-CSCF IPv4 address and the SMF has provided P-CSCF address(es) during the PDU session establishment procedure, if the network-requested PDU session modification procedure is triggered for P-CSCF restoration, the SMF shall include the P-CSCF IP address(es) in the Extended protocol configuration options IE in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message as specified in subclause5.8.2.2 of 3GPPTS23.380[54].



Figure6.3.2.2.1: Network-requested PDU session modification procedure

6.3.2.3 Network-requested PDU session modification procedure accepted by the UE

Upon receipt of the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message, if the UE provided a DNN during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall stop timer T3396, if it is running for the DNN provided by the UE. If the UE did not provide a DNN during the PDU session establishment and the request type was different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", the UE shall stop the timer T3396 associated with no DNN if it is running. If the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message was received for an emergency PDU session, the UE shall not stop the timer T3396 associated with no DNN if it is running.

Upon receipt of the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message, if the UE provided an S-NSSAI and a DNN during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall stop timer T3584, if it is running for the [S-NSSAI of the PDU session, DNN] combination provided by the UE. If the UE provided a DNN and did not provide an S-NSSAI during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall stop timer T3584, if it is running for the same [no S-NSSAI, DNN] combination provided by the UE. If the UE provided an S-NSSAI and did not provide a DNN during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall stop timer T3584, if it is running for the same [S-NSSAI, no DNN] combination provided by the UE. If the UE provided neither a DNN nor an S-NSSAI during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall stop timer T3584, if it is running for the same [no S-NSSAI, no DNN] combination provided by the UE. The timer T3584 to be stopped includes the timer T3584 applied for all the PLMNs, if running, and the timer T3584 applied for the registered PLMN, if running.

Upon receipt of the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message, if the UE provided an S-NSSAI during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall stop timer T3585, if it is running for the S-NSSAI of the PDU session. If the UE did not provide an S-NSSAI during the PDU session establishment and the request type was different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", the UE shall stop the timer T3585 associated with no S-NSSAI if it is running. The timer T3585 to be stopped includes the timer T3585 applied for all the PLMNs, if running, and the timer T3585 applied for the registered PLMN, if running. If the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message was received for an emergency PDU session, the UE shall not stop the timer T3585 associated with no S-NSSAI if it is running.

NOTE1: Upon receipt of the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message for a PDU session, if the UE provided a DNN (or no DNN) and an S-NSSAI (or no S-NSSAI) when the PDU session is established, timer T3396 associated with the DNN (or no DNN, if no DNN was provided by the UE) is running, and timer T3584 associated with the DNN (or no DNN, if no DNN was provided by the UE) and the S-NSSAI of the PDU session (or no S-NSSAI, if no S-NSSAI was provided by the UE) is running, then the UE stops both the timer T3396 and the timer T3584.

NOTE2: Upon receipt of the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message for a PDU session, if the UE provided a DNN (or no DNN) and an S-NSSAI (or no S-NSSAI) when the PDU session is established, timer T3585 associated with the S-NSSAI of the PDU session (or no S-NSSAI, if no S-NSSAI was provided by the UE) is running, and timer T3584 associated with the DNN (or no DNN, if no DNN was provided by the UE) and the S-NSSAI of the PDU session (or no S-NSSAI, if no S-NSSAI was provided by the UE) is running, then the UE stops both the timer T3585 and the timer T3584.

If the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message includes the Authorized QoS rules IE, the UE shall process the QoS rules sequentially starting with the first QoS rule.

If the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message includes the Mapped EPS bearer contexts IE, the UE shall process the mapped EPS bearer contexts sequentially starting with the first mapped EPS bearer context.

If the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message includes the Authorized QoS flow descriptions IE, the UE shall process the QoS flow descriptions sequentially starting with the first QoS flow description.

The UE shall replace the stored authorized QoS rules, authorized QoS flow descriptions and session-AMBR of the PDU session with the received value(s), if any, in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message.

If the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message includes a Mapped EPS bearer contexts IE, the UE shall check each mapped EPS bearer context for different types of errors as follows:

NOTE3: An error detected in a mapped EPS bearer context does not cause the UE to discard the Authorized QoS rules IE and Authorized QoS flow descriptions IE included in the PDU SESSION MODICATION COMMAND message, if any.

a) Semantic error in the mapped EPS bearer operation:

1) operation code = "Create new EPS bearer" and there is already an existing mapped EPS bearer context with the same EPS bearer identity associated with any PDU session.

2) operation code = "Delete existing EPS bearer" and there is no existing mapped EPS bearer context with the same EPS bearer identity associated with the PDU session that is being modified.

3) operation code = "Modify existing EPS bearer" and there is no existing mapped EPS bearer context with the same EPS bearer identity associated with the PDU session that is being modified.

4) operation code = "Create new EPS bearer" or "Modify existing EPS bearer" and the resulting mapped EPS bearer context has invalid mandatory parameters or missing mandatory parameters (e.g., mapped EPS QoS parameters or traffic flow template for a dedicated EPS bearer context).

 In case 1, if the existing mapped EPS bearer context is associated with the PDU session that is being modified, the UE shall not diagnose an error, further process the create request and, if it was process successfully, delete the old EPS bearer context.

 In case 2, the UE shall not diagnose an error, further process the delete request and, if it was processed successfully, consider the mapped EPS bearer context as successfully deleted.

 Otherwise, after sending the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMPLETE for the ongoing PDU session modification procedure, the UE shall initiate a PDU session modification procedure by sending a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message to delete the mapped EPS bearer context with 5GSM cause #85 "Invalid mapped EPS bearer identity".

b) if the mapped EPS bearer context includes a traffic flow template, the UE shall check the traffic flow template for different types of TFT IE errors as follows:

1) Semantic errors in TFT operations:

i) TFT operation = "Create new TFT" when there is already an existing TFT for the EPS bearer context.

ii) When the TFT operation is an operation other than "Create a new TFT" and there is no TFT for the EPS bearer context.

iii) TFT operation = "Delete packet filters from existing TFT" when it would render the TFT empty.

iv) TFT operation = "Delete existing TFT" for a dedicated EPS bearer context.

 In case iv, after sending the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMPLETE for the ongoing PDU session modification procedure, the UE shall initiate a PDU session modification procedure by sending a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message to delete the mapped EPS bearer context with 5GSM cause #41 "semantic error in the TFT operation".

 In the other cases the UE shall not diagnose an error and perform the following actions to resolve the inconsistency:

 In case i, the UE shall further process the new activation request to create a new TFT and, if it was processed successfully, delete the old TFT.

 In case ii, the UE shall:

- process the new request and if the TFT operation is "Delete existing TFT" or "Delete packet filters from existing TFT", and if no error according to items 2, 3, and 4 was detected, consider the TFT as successfully deleted;

- process the new request as an activation request, if the TFT operation is "Add packet filters in existing TFT" or "Replace packet filters in existing TFT".

 In case iii, if the packet filters belong to a dedicated EPS bearer context, the UE shall process the new deletion request and, if no error according to items 2, 3, and 4 was detected, after sending the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMPLETE for the ongoing PDU session modification procedure, the UE shall initiate a PDU session modification procedure by sending a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message to delete the mapped EPS bearer context with 5GSM cause #41 "semantic error in the TFT operation".

 In case iii, if the packet filters belong to the default EPS bearer context, the UE shall process the new deletion request and if no error according to items 2, 3, and 4 was detected then delete the existing TFT, this corresponds to using match-all packet filter for the default EPS bearer context.

2) Syntactical errors in TFT operations:

i) When the TFT operation = "Create new TFT", "Add packet filters in existing TFT", "Replace packet filters in existing TFT" or "Delete packet filters from existing TFT" and the packet filter list in the TFT IE is empty.

ii) TFT operation = "Delete existing TFT" or "No TFT operation" with a non-empty packet filter list in the TFT IE.

iii) TFT operation = "Replace packet filters in existing TFT" when the packet filter to be replaced does not exist in the original TFT.

iv) TFT operation = "Delete packet filters from existing TFT" when the packet filter to be deleted does not exist in the original TFT.

v) Void.

vi) When there are other types of syntactical errors in the coding of the TFT IE, such as a mismatch between the number of packet filters subfield, and the number of packet filters in the packet filter list when the TFT operation is "delete existing TFT" or "create new TFT", or the number of packet filters subfield is larger than the maximum possible number of packet filters in the packet filter list.

 In case iii, the UE shall not diagnose an error, further process the replace request and, if no error according to items 3 and 4 was detected, include the packet filters received to the existing TFT.

 In case iv, the UE shall not diagnose an error, further process the deletion request and, if no error according to items 3 and 4 was detected, consider the respective packet filter as successfully deleted.

 Otherwise, after sending the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMPLETE for the ongoing PDU session modification procedure, the UE shall initiate a PDU session modification procedure by sending a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message to delete the mapped EPS bearer context with 5GSM cause #42 "syntactical error in the TFT operation".

3) Semantic errors in packet filters:

i) When a packet filter consists of conflicting packet filter components which would render the packet filter ineffective, i.e. no IP packet will ever fit this packet filter. How the UE determines a semantic error in a packet filter is outside the scope of the present document.

ii) When the resulting TFT, which is assigned to a dedicated EPS bearer context, does not contain any packet filter applicable for the uplink direction among the packet filters created on request from the network.

 After sending the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMPLETE for the ongoing PDU session modification procedure, the UE shall initiate a PDU session modification procedure by sending a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message to delete the mapped EPS bearer context with 5GSM cause #44 "semantic errors in packet filter(s)".

4) Syntactical errors in packet filters:

i) When the TFT operation = "Create new TFT", "Add packet filters to existing TFT", or "Replace packet filters in existing TFT" and two or more packet filters in the resultant TFT would have identical packet filter identifiers.

ii) When the TFT operation = "Create new TFT", "Add packet filters to existing TFT" or "Replace packet filters in existing TFT", and two or more packet filters among all TFTs associated with this PDN connection would have identical packet filter precedence values.

iii) When there are other types of syntactical errors in the coding of packet filters, such as the use of a reserved value for a packet filter component identifier.

 In case i, if two or more packet filters with identical packet filter identifiers are contained in the new request, after sending the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMPLETE for the ongoing PDU session modification procedure, the UE shall initiate a PDU session modification procedure by sending a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message to delete the mapped EPS bearer context with 5GSM cause #45 "syntactical error in packet filter(s)". Otherwise, the UE shall not diagnose an error, further process the new request and, if it was processed successfully, delete the old packet filters which have the identical packet filter identifiers.

 In case ii, if the old packet filters do not belong to the default EPS bearer context, the UE shall not diagnose an error, shall further process the new request and, if it was processed successfully, shall delete the old packet filters which have identical filter precedence values.

 In case ii, if one or more old packet filters belong to the default EPS bearer context, after sending the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMPLETE for the ongoing PDU session modification procedure, the UE shall initiate a PDU session modification procedure by sending a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message to delete the mapped EPS bearer context with 5GSM cause #45 "syntactical errors in packet filter(s)".

 Otherwise, after sending the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMPLETE for the ongoing PDU session modification procedure, the UE shall initiate a PDU session modification procedure by sending a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message to delete the mapped EPS bearer context with 5GSM cause #45 "syntactical error in packet filter(s)".

And if a new EPS bearer identity parameter in Authorized QoS flow descriptions IE is received for a QoS flow which can be transferred to EPS, the UE shall update the association between the QoS flow and the mapped EPS bearer context, based on the new EPS bearer identity and the mapped EPS bearer contexts. If the "Delete existing EPS bearer" operation code in the Mapped EPS bearer contexts IE was received, the UE shall discard the association between the QoS flow and the corresponding mapped EPS bearer context.

If:

a) the UE detects different errors in the mapped EPS bearer contexts as described above which requires sending a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message to delete the erroneous mapped EPS bearer contexts; and

b) optionally, if the UE detects errors in QoS rules that require to delete at least one QoS rule as described in subclause6.3.2.4 which requires sending a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message to delete the erroneous QoS rules;

the UE, after sending the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMPLETE message for the ongoing PDU session modification procedure, may send a single PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message to delete the erroneous mapped EPS bearer contexts, and optionally to delete the erroneous QoS rules. The UE shall include a 5GSM cause IE in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message.

NOTE4: The 5GSM cause to use cannot be different from #41 "semantic error in the TFT operation", #42 "syntactical error in the TFT operation", #44 "semantic error in packet filter(s)", #45 "syntactical errors in packet filter(s)", #83 "semantic error in the QoS operation", #84 "syntactical error in the QoS operation", or #85 "Invalid mapped EPS bearer identity". The selection of a 5GSM cause is up to UE implementation.

Upon receipt of a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message and a PDU session ID, using the NAS transport procedure as specified in subclause5.4.5, if the UE accepts the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message, the UE considers the PDU session as modified and the UE shall create a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMPLETE message.

If the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message contains the PTI value allocated in the UE-requested PDU session modification procedure, the UE shall stop the timer T3581. The UE should ensure that the PTI value assigned to this procedure is not released immediately.

NOTE5: The way to achieve this is implementation dependent. For example, the UE can ensure that the PTI value assigned to this procedure is not released during the time equal to or greater than the default value of timer T3591.

While the PTI value is not released, the UE regards any received PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message with the same PTI value as a network retransmission (see subclause7.3.1).

If the selected SSC mode of the PDU session is "SSC mode 3" and the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message includes 5GSM cause #39 "reactivation requested", the UE can provide to the upper layers the PDU session address lifetime if received in the PDU session address lifetime parameter of the Extended protocol configuration options IE of the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message. After the completion of the network-requested PDU session modification procedure:

a) if the PDU session is an MA PDU session:

1) established over both 3GPP access and non-3GPP access, and:

- the UE is registered over both 3GPP access and non-3GPP access in the same PLMN:

- the UE should re-initiate a UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure as specified in subclause6.4.1 over the access the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message is received; or

- the UE is registered over both 3GPP access and non-3GPP access in different PLMNs:

- the UE should re-initiate UE-requested PDU session establishment procedures as specified in subclause 6.4.1 over both accesses. The UE should re-initiate the UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure over the access the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message is received first; or

2) established over only single access:

- the UE should re-initiate a UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure as specified in subclause 6.4.1 over the access the user plane resources were established; or

b) if the PDU session is a single access PDU session:

- the UE should re-initiate a UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure as specified in subclause 6.4.1 over the access the PDU session was associated with; and

for the re-initiated UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure(s) the UE should set a new PDU session ID different from the PDU session ID associated with the present PDU session and should set:

a) the PDU session type to the PDU session type associated with the present PDU session;

b) the SSC mode to the SSC mode associated with the present PDU session;

c) the DNN to the DNN associated with the present PDU session; and

d) the S-NSSAI to the S-NSSAI associated with (if available in roaming scenarios) a mapped S-NSSAI if provided in the UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure of the present PDU session.

If the UE has indicated support for CIoT 5GS optimizations and receives a small data rate control parameters container in the Extended protocol configuration options IE in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message, the UE shall store the small data rate control parameters value and use the stored small data rate control parameters value as the maximum allowed limit of uplink user data for the PDU session in accordance with 3GPPTS23.501[8]. If the UE has a previously stored small data rate control parameter value for the PDU session, the UE shall replace the stored small data rate control parameters value for the PDU session with the received small data rate control parameters value in the Extended protocol configuration options IE in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message.

If the UE has indicated support for CIoT 5GS optimizations and receives an additional small data rate control parameters for exception data container in the Extended protocol configuration options IE in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message, the UE shall store the additional small data rate control parameters for exception data value and use the stored additional small data rate control parameters for exception data value as the maximum allowed limit of uplink exception data for the PDU session in accordance with 3GPPTS23.501[8]. If the UE has a previously stored additional small data rate control parameters for exception data value for the PDU session, the UE shall replace the stored additional small data rate control parameters for exception data value for the PDU session with the received additional small data rate control parameters for exception data value in the Extended protocol configuration options IE in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message.

The UE shall include the PDU session ID of the old PDU session which is about to get released in the old PDU session ID IE of the UL NAS TRANSPORT message that transports the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message.

NOTE6: The UE is expected to maintain the PDU session for which the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message including 5GSM cause #39 "reactivation requested" is received during the time indicated by the PDU session address lifetime value or until receiving an indication from upper layers (e.g. that the old PDU session is no more needed).

If the selected PDU session type of the PDU session is "Unstructured", the UE supports inter-system change from N1 mode to S1 mode, the UE does not support establishment of a PDN connection for the PDN type set to "non-IP" in S1 mode, and the parameters list field of one or more authorized QoS flow descriptions received in the Authorized QoS flow descriptions IE of the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message contains an EPS bearer identity (EBI), then the UE shall locally remove the EPS bearer identity (EBI) from the parameters list field of such one or more authorized QoS flow descriptions. After sending the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMPLETE message for the ongoing PDU session modification procedure, the UE shall initiate a PDU session modification procedure by sending a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message to delete the mapped EPS bearer context with 5GSM cause #85 "Invalid mapped EPS bearer identity".

If the selected PDU session type of the PDU session is "Ethernet", the UE supports inter-system change from N1 mode to S1 mode, the UE does not support establishment of a PDN connection for the PDN type set to "non-IP" in S1 mode, the UE, the network or both of them do not support Ethernet PDN type in S1 mode, and the parameters list field of one or more authorized QoS flow descriptions received in the Authorized QoS flow descriptions IE of the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message contains an EPS bearer identity (EBI), the UE shall locally remove the EPS bearer identity (EBI) from the parameters list field of such one or more authorized QoS flow descriptions. After sending the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMPLETE message for the ongoing PDU session modification procedure, the UE shall initiate a PDU session modification procedure by sending a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message to delete the mapped EPS bearer context with 5GSM cause #85 "Invalid mapped EPS bearer identity".

For a UE which is registered for disaster roaming services and for a PDU session which is not a PDU session for emergency services:

a) if the parameters list field of one or more authorized QoS flow descriptions received in the Authorized QoS flow descriptions IE of the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message contains an EPS bearer identity (EBI), then the UE shall locally remove the EPS bearer identity (EBI) from the parameters list field of such one or more authorized QoS flow descriptions; and

b) the UE shall locally delete the contents of the Mapped EPS bearer contexts IE if it is received in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message.

If the Always-on PDU session indication IE is included in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message and:

a) the value of the IE is set to "Always-on PDU session required", the UE shall consider the established PDU session as an always-on PDU session; or

b) the value of the IE is set to "Always-on PDU session not allowed", the UE shall not consider the established PDU session as an always-on PDU session.

If the UE does not receive the Always-on PDU session indication IE in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message:

a) if the network-requested PDU session modification procedure is triggered by a UE-requested PDU session modification procedure upon an inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode for a PDN connection established when in S1 mode, the UE shall not consider the modified PDU session as an always-on PDU session; or

b) otherwise:

1) if the UE has received the Always-on PDU session indication IE with the value set to "Always-on PDU session required" for this PDU session, the UE shall consider the PDU session as an always-on PDU session; or

2) otherwise the UE shall not consider the PDU session as an always-on PDU session.

If the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message contains a Port management information container IE, the UE shall forward the contents of the Port management information container IE to the DS-TT (see 3GPPTS23.501[8] and 3GPPTS23.502[9]).

If the UE receives a Serving PLMN rate control IE in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message, the UE shall store the Serving PLMN rate control IE value, replacing any existing value, and use the stored serving PLMN rate control value as the maximum allowed limit of uplink control plane user data for the corresponding PDU session in accordance with 3GPPTS23.501[8].

If the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message includes the Received MBS container IE, for each of the Received MBS informations:

a) if MBS decision is set to "MBS join is accepted", the UE shall consider that it has successfully joined the MBS session. The UE shall store the received TMGI and shall use it for any further operation on that MBS session. The UE shall store the received MBS service area associated with the received TMGI, if any. The UE may provide the MBS start time if it is included in the Received MBS information to upper layers;

b) if MBS decision is set to "MBS join is rejected", the UE shall consider the requested join as rejected. The UE shall store the received MBS service area associated with the received TMGI, if any. If the received Rejection cause is set to "User is outside of local MBS service area", the UE shall not request to join the same MBS session if the UE is camping on a cell that is outside the received MBS service area. If the received Rejection cause is set to "MBS session has not started or will not start soon" and an MBS back-off timer value is included with value that indicates neither zero nor deactivated, the UE shall start a back-off timer T3530 with the value provided in the MBS back-off timer value for the received TMGI, and shall not attempt to join the MBS session with the same TMGI until the expiry of T3530. If the MBS back-off timer value indicates that this timer is deactivated, the UE shall not attempt to join the MBS session with the same TMGI until the UE is switched off, the USIM is removed, or the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated. If the MBS back-off timer value indicates zero, the UE may attempt to join the MBS session with the same TMGI;

c) if the MBS decision is set to "Remove UE from MBS session", the UE shall consider that it has successfully left the MBS session. If the received Rejection cause is set to "MBS session is released", the UE shall consider the MBS session as released; or

d) if the MBS decision is set to "MBS service area update", the UE shall store the received MBS service area associated with the received TMGI and replace the current MBS service area with the received one. 

If the UE has indicated support for ECS configuration information provisioning, then upon receiving 

- one or more ECS IPv4 address(es), ECS IPv6 address(es), ECS FQDN(s); 

- one or more associated ECSP identifier(s);and

- optionally spatial validity conditions associated with the ECS address

in the Extended protocol configuration options IE of the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message, then the UE shall pass them to the upper layers..

If the UE supports receiving DNS server addresses in protocol configuration options and receives one or more DNS server IPv4 address(es), one or more DNS server IPv6 address(es) or both of them, in the Extended protocol configuration options IE of the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message, then the UE shall pass the received DNS server IPv4 address(es), if any, and the received DNS server IPv6 address(es), if any, to upper layers.

NOTE7: The received DNS server address(es) replace previously provided DNS server address(es), if any.

If the UE supports the EAS rediscovery and receives:

a) the EAS rediscovery indication without indicated impact; or

b) the following:

1) one or more EAS rediscovery indication(s) with impacted EAS IPv4 address range, if supported by the UE;

2) one or more EAS rediscovery indication(s) with impacted EAS IPv6 address range, if supported by the UE;

3) one or more EAS rediscovery indication(s) with impacted EAS FQDN, if supported by the UE; or

4) any combination of the above;

in the Extended protocol configuration options IE of the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message, then the UE shall pass the EAS rediscovery indication and the received impacted EAS IPv4 address range(s), if supported and included, the received EAS IPv6 address range(s), if supported and included, and the received EAS FQDN(s), if supported and included, to upper layers.

NOTE8: The upper layers handle the EAS rediscovery indication and the impacted EAS IPv4 address range(s), if any, the impacted EAS IPv6 address range(s), if any, and the received EAS FQDN(s), if any, according to 3GPPTS23.548[10A].

Upon receipt of PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message, if the network-requested PDU session modification procedure is triggered by a UE-requested PDU session modification procedure, the Service-level-AA container IE is included, then the UE shall forward the service-level-AA contents of the Service-level-AA container IE to the upper layers.

If the UE supports EDC and receives the EDC usage allowed indicator in the Extended protocol configuration options IE of the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message, the UE shall indicate to upper layers that network allows the use of EDC.

If the UE supports EDC and receives the EDC usage required indicator in the Extended protocol configuration options IE of the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message, the UE shall indicate to upper layers that network requires the use of EDC.

NOTE9: Handling of indication that network allows the use of EDC or that network requires the use of EDC is specified in 3GPPTS23.548[182].

The UE shall transport the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMPLETE message and the PDU session ID, using the NAS transport procedure as specified in subclause5.4.5.

After sending the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMPLETE message, if the "Create new EPS bearer" operation code in the Mapped EPS bearer contexts IE was received in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message and there is neither a corresponding Authorized QoS flow descriptions IE in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message nor an existing QoS flow description corresponding to the EPS bearer identity included in the mapped EPS bearer context, the UE shall send a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message including a Mapped EPS bearer contexts IE to delete the mapped EPS bearer context.

After sending the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMPLETE message, if for the PDU session being modified, there are mapped EPS bearer context(s) but none of them is associated with the default QoS rule, the UE shall locally delete the mapped EPS bearer context(s) and shall locally delete the stored EPS bearer identity (EBI) in all the QoS flow descriptions of the PDU session, if any.

If a port management information container needs to be delivered (see 3GPPTS23.501[8] and 3GPPTS23.502[9]), the UE shall include a Port management information container IE in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMPLETE message.

Upon receipt of a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMPLETE message, the SMF shall stop timer T3591 and shall consider the PDU session as modified. If the selected SSC mode of the PDU session is "SSC mode 3" and the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message included 5GSM cause #39 "reactivation requested", the SMF shall start timer T3593. If the PDU Session Address Lifetime value is sent to the UE in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message then timer T3593 shall be started with the same value, otherwise it shall use a default value. If the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMPLETE message contains a Port management information container IE, the SMF shall handle the contents of the Port management information container IE as specified in 3GPPTS23.501[8] and 3GPPTS23.502[9].

6.3.2.4 Network-requested PDU session modification procedure not accepted by the UE

Upon receipt of a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message and a PDU session ID, using the NAS transport procedure as specified in subclause5.4.5, if the UE rejects the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message, the UE shall create a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND REJECT message.

If the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message contains the PTI value allocated in the UE-requested PDU session modification procedure, the UE shall stop the timer T3581. The UE should ensure that the PTI value assigned to this procedure is not released immediately.

NOTE1: The way to achieve this is implementation dependent. For example, the UE can ensure that the PTI value assigned to this procedure is not released during the time equal to or greater than the default value of timer T3591.

While the PTI value is not released, the UE regards any received PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message with the same PTI value as a network retransmission (see subclause7.3.1).

The UE shall set the 5GSM cause IE of the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND REJECT message to indicate the reason for rejecting the PDU session modification.

The 5GSM cause IE typically indicates one of the following 5GSM cause values:

#26 insufficient resources;

#44 semantic error in packet filter(s);

#45 syntactical error in packet filter(s);

#83 semantic error in the QoS operation; or

#84 syntactical error in the QoS operation.

If the selected SSC mode of the PDU session is "SSC mode 3" and the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND messages includes 5GSM cause #39 "reactivation requested", while the UE does not have sufficient resources for initiating the PDU session establishment procedure as specified in subclause6.4.1 then the UE shall set cause IE to #26 "insufficient resources".

If the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message includes a request to add a new authorized QoS rule, or a request to modify the authorized QoS rules, or both, and the UE decides to reject the request due to e.g. the supported number of authorized QoS rules or number of packet filters associated with a PDU session having reached the maximum number, then the UE shall set the 5GSM cause IE to #26 "insufficient resources".

NOTE2: The maximum number of supported authorized QoS rules or packet filters associated with a PDU session is implementation specific.

If the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message includes a request to add a new authorized QoS flow description, or a request to modify the authorized QoS flow descriptions, or both and the UE decides to reject the request due to e.g. the supported number of authorized QoS flow descriptions, then the UE shall set the 5GSM cause IE to #26 "insufficient resources".

NOTE3: The maximum number of supported authorized QoS flow descriptions associated with a PDU session is implementation specific.

If the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message includes the Authorized QoS rules IE, the UE shall process the QoS rules sequentially starting with the first QoS rule. The UE shall check the QoS rule and the QoS flow description provided in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message for different types of errors as follows:

NOTE4: If an error is detected in a QoS rule or a QoS flow description which requires rejecting the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message, then the Authorized QoS rules IE, the Authorized QoS flow descriptions IE, the Mapped EPS bearer contexts IE and any other IE (RQ timer value IE, Always-on PDU session indication IE, etc) included in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message are discarded, if any.

a) Semantic errors in QoS operations:

1) When the rule operation is "Modify existing QoS rule and add packet filters", "Modify existing QoS rule and replace all packet filters", "Modify existing QoS rule and delete packet filters" or "Modify existing QoS rule without modifying packet filters" on the default QoS rule and the DQR bit is set to "the QoS rule is not the default QoS rule".

2) When the rule operation is "Modify existing QoS rule and add packet filters", "Modify existing QoS rule and replace all packet filters", "Modify existing QoS rule and delete packet filters" or "Modify existing QoS rule without modifying packet filters" on a QoS rule which is not the default QoS rule and the DQR bit is set to "the QoS rule is the default QoS rule".

3) When the rule operation is "Create new QoS rule" and the DQR bit is set to "the QoS rule is the default QoS rule" when there's already a default QoS rule with different QoS rule identifier.

4) When the rule operation is "Delete existing QoS rule" on the default QoS rule.

5) When the rule operation is "Create new QoS rule", "Modify existing QoS rule and add packet filters", "Modify existing QoS rule and replace all packet filters", "Modify existing QoS rule and delete packet filters ", or "Modify existing QoS rule without modifying packet filters" and two or more QoS rules associated with this PDU session would have identical precedence values, and the UE is not in NB-N1 mode.

6) When the rule operation is "Modify existing QoS rule and delete packet filters", the QoS rule is a QoS rule of a PDU session of IPv4, IPv6, IPv4v6 or Ethernet PDU session type, and the packet filter list in the resultant QoS rule is empty.

7) When the rule operation is "Create new QoS rule", there is already an existing QoS rule with the same QoS rule identifier and the UE is not in NB-N1 mode.

8) When the rule operation is "Modify existing QoS rule and add packet filters", "Modify existing QoS rule and replace all packet filters", "Modify existing QoS rule and delete packet filters" or "Modify existing QoS rule without modifying packet filters", the associated QoS rule does not exist and the UE is not in NB-N1 mode.

9) When the rule operation is different than "Delete existing QoS rule", the DQR bit of the QoS rule is set to "the QoS rule is not the default QoS rule" and the UE is in NB-N1 mode.

10) When the rule operation is "Create new QoS rule", the DQR bit is set to "the QoS rule is not the default QoS rule", and the PDU session type of the PDU session is "Unstructured".

11) When the rule operation is "Delete existing QoS rule" and there is no existing QoS rule with the same QoS rule identifier.

12) When the flow description operation is "Create new QoS flow description", there is already an existing QoS flow description with the same QoS flow identifier and the UE is not in NB-N1 mode.

13) When the flow description operation is "Modify existing QoS flow description", the associated QoS flow description does not exist and the UE is not in NB-N1 mode.

14) When the flow description operation is "Delete existing QoS flow description" and there is no existing QoS flow description with the same QoS flow identifier.

15) When the flow description operation is different than "Delete existing QoS flow description", the QFI is not the same as the QFI of the default QoS rule and the UE is in NB-N1 mode.

16) When the flow description operation is "Create new QoS flow description" or "Modify existing QoS flow description", the QFI associated with the QoS flow description is not the same as the QFI of the default QoS rule, and the PDU session type of the PDU session is "Unstructured".

17) When the rule operation is "Modify existing QoS rule and add packet filters", the "packet filter list" field contains a match-all packet filter, the resultant QoS rule is the default QoS rule and there is already an existing match-all packet filter associated with the default QoS rule.

18) When the rule operation is "Create new QoS rule" and the DQR bit is set to "the QoS rule is not the default QoS rule", or the rule operation is "Modify existing QoS rule and add packet filters" on a QoS rule which is not the default QoS rule or "Modify existing QoS rule and replace all packet filters" on a QoS rule which is not the default QoS rule, and one match-all packet filter is to be associated with the resultant QoS rule.

 In case 4, the UE shall initiate a PDU session release procedure by sending a PDU SESSION RELEASE REQUEST message with 5GSM cause #83 "semantic error in the QoS operation".

 In case 5, if the old QoS rule (i.e. the QoS rule that existed before the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message was received) is not the default QoS rule, the UE shall not diagnose an error, shall further process the new request and, if it was processed successfully, shall delete the old QoS rule which has identical precedence value. Furthermore, after sending the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMPLETE for the ongoing PDU session modification procedure, the UE shall send a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with 5GSM cause #83 "semantic error in the QoS operation" to delete the QoS rule.

 In case 5, if the old QoS rule (i.e. the QoS rule that existed before the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message was received) is the default QoS rule, the UE shall initiate a PDU session release procedure by sending a PDU SESSION RELEASE REQUEST message with 5GSM cause #83 "semantic error in the QoS operation".

 In case 6, if the QoS rule is not the default QoS rule, after sending the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMPLETE for the ongoing PDU session modification procedure, the UE shall send a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with 5GSM cause #83 "semantic error in the QoS operation" to delete the QoS rule.

 In case 6, if the QoS rule is the default QoS rule, the UE shall initiate a PDU session release procedure by sending a PDU SESSION RELEASE REQUEST message with 5GSM cause #83 "semantic error in the QoS operation".

 In case 7, if the existing QoS rule is not the default QoS rule and the DQR bit of the new QoS rule is set to "the QoS rule is not the default QoS rule", the UE shall not diagnose an error, further process the create request and, if it was processed successfully, delete the old QoS rule. If the existing QoS rule is the default QoS rule or the DQR bit of the new QoS rule is set to "the QoS rule is the default QoS rule", the UE shall reject the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message with 5GSM cause #83 "semantic error in the QoS operation".

 In case 9 or case 10, after sending the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMPLETE for the ongoing PDU session modification procedure, the UE shall send a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with 5GSM cause #83 "semantic error in the QoS operation" to delete the QoS rule.

 In case 11, the UE shall not diagnose an error, further process the delete request and, if it was processed successfully, consider the respective QoS rule as successfully deleted.

 In case 12, the UE shall not diagnose an error, further process the create request and, if it was processed successfully, delete the old QoS flow description.

 In case 14, the UE shall not diagnose an error, further process the delete request and, if it was processed successfully, consider the respective QoS flow description as successfully deleted.

 In case 15 or case 16, after sending the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMPLETE for the ongoing PDU session modification procedure, the UE shall send a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with 5GSM cause #83 "semantic error in the QoS operation" to delete the QoS flow description.

 Otherwise, the UE shall reject the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message with 5GSM cause #83 "semantic error in the QoS operation".

b) Syntactical errors in QoS operations:

1) When the rule operation is "Create new QoS rule", "Modify existing QoS rule and add packet filters", "Modify existing QoS rule and replace all packet filters" or "Modify existing QoS rule and delete packet filters", the PDU session type of the PDU session is IPv4, IPv6, IPv4v6 or Ethernet PDU session type, and the packet filter list in the QoS rule is empty.

2) When the rule operation is "Delete existing QoS rule" or "Modify existing QoS rule without modifying packet filters" with a non-empty packet filter list in the QoS rule.

3) When the rule operation is "Modify existing QoS rule and delete packet filters" and the packet filter to be deleted does not exist in the original QoS rule.

4) Void.

5) When there are other types of syntactical errors in the coding of the Authorized QoS rules IE or the Authorized QoS flow descriptions IE, such as: a mismatch between the number of packet filters subfield and the number of packet filters in the packet filter list when the rule operation is "delete existing QoS rule" or "create new QoS rule", or the number of packet filters subfield is larger than the maximum possible number of packet filters in the packet filter list (i.e., there is no QoS rule precedence subfield included in the QoS rule IE), the QoS Rule Identifier is set to "no QoS rule identifier assigned", or the QoS flow identifier is set to "no QoS flow identifier assigned".

6) When the rule operation is "Create new QoS rule", "Modify existing QoS rule and add packet filters" or "Modify existing QoS rule and replace all packet filters", the DQR bit is set to "the QoS rule is the default QoS rule", the PDU session type of the PDU session is "Unstructured", and the packet filter list in the QoS rule is not empty.

7) When, the

A) rule operation is "Create new QoS rule", "Modify existing QoS rule and add packet filters", "Modify existing QoS rule and replace all packet filters", "Modify existing QoS rule and delete packet filters" or "Modify existing QoS rule without modifying packet filters", there is no QoS flow description with a QFI corresponding to the QFI of the resulting QoS rule and the UE determines, by using the QoS rules QFI as the 5QI, that there is a resulting QoS rule for a GBR QoS flow (as described in 3GPPTS23.501[8] table5.7.4-1).

B) flow description operation is "Delete existing QoS flow description", and the UE determines, by using the QoS rules QFI as the 5QI, that there is a resulting QoS rule for a GBR QoS flow (as described in 3GPPTS23.501[8] table5.7.4-1) with a QFI corresponding to the QFI of the QoS flow description that is deleted (i.e. there is no associated QoS flow description with the same QFI).

8) When the flow description operation is "Create new QoS flow description" or "Modify existing QoS flow description", and the UE determines that there is a QoS flow description of a GBR QoS flow (as described in 3GPP TS 23.501 [8] table 5.7.4-1) which lacks at least one of the mandatory parameters (i.e., GFBR uplink, GFBR downlink, MFBR uplink and MFBR downlink). If the QoS flow description does not include a 5QI, the UE determines this by using the QFI as the 5QI,

 In case 3 the UE shall not diagnose an error, further process the deletion request and, if no error according to items c and d was detected, consider the respective packet filter as successfully deleted.

 In case 6, after completion of the PDU session modification procedure, the UE shall send a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with 5GSM cause #84 "syntactical error in the QoS operations" to delete all the packet filters for the default QoS rule.

 In case 7, if the Authorized QoS rules IE contains at least one other valid QoS rule, the UE shall not diagnose an error and shall further process the request, if no error according to items c and d was detected. After completion of the PDU session modification procedure, the UE shall delete the QoS rule for which no corresponding QoS flow description is available and initiate UE-requested PDU session modification procedure with 5GSM cause #84 "syntactical error in the QoS operation" to delete the QoS rule for which it has deleted.

 In case 8, if the default QoS rule is associated with the QoS flow description which lacks at least one of the mandatory parameters, the UE shall initiate a PDU session release procedure by sending a PDU SESSION RELEASE REQUEST message with 5GSM cause #84 "syntactical error in the QoS operation". Otherwise, if the Authorized QoS rules IE contains at least one other valid QoS rule or the QoS flow description IE contains at least one other valid QoS flow description, the UE shall not diagnose an error and shall further process the request, if no error according to items c and d was detected. After completion of the PDU session modification procedure, the UE shall delete the QoS flow description which lacks at least one of the mandatory parameters and the associated QoS rule(s), if any, and initiate UE-requested PDU session modification procedure with 5GSM cause #84 "syntactical error in the QoS operation" to delete the QoS flow description and the associated QoS rule(s), if any, which it has deleted.

 Otherwise the UE shall reject the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message with 5GSM cause #84 "syntactical error in the QoS operation".

NOTE5: It is not considered an error if the UE determines that after processing all QoS operations on QoS rules and QoS flow descriptions there is a QoS flow description that is not associated with any QoS rule and the UE is not in NB-N1 mode.

c) Semantic errors in packet filters:

1) When a packet filter consists of conflicting packet filter components which would render the packet filter ineffective, i.e. no IP packet will ever fit this packet filter. How the UE determines a semantic error in a packet filter is outside the scope of the present document.

 The UE shall reject the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message with 5GSM cause #44 "semantic error in packet filter(s)".

d) Syntactical errors in packet filters:

1) When the rule operation is "Create new QoS rule", "Modify existing QoS rule and add packet filters" or "Modify existing QoS rule and replace all packet filters", and two or more packet filters in the resultant QoS rule would have identical packet filter identifiers.

2) When there are other types of syntactical errors in the coding of packet filters, such as the use of a reserved value for a packet filter component identifier.

 In case 1, if two or more packet filters with identical packet filter identifiers are contained in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message, the UE shall reject the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND with 5GSM cause #45 "syntactical errors in packet filter(s)". Otherwise, the UE shall not diagnose an error, further process the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message and, if it was processed successfully, replace the old packet filter with the new packet filter which have the identical packet filter identifiers.

 Otherwise the UE shall reject the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message with 5GSM cause #45 "syntactical errors in packet filter(s)".

If:

a) the UE detects errors in QoS rules that require to delete at least one QoS rule as described above which requires sending a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message to delete the erroneous mapped EPS bearer contexts; and

b) optionally, if the UE detects different errors in the mapped EPS bearer contexts as described in subclause6.3.2.3 which requires sending a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message to delete the erroneous QoS rules;

the UE, after sending the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMPLETE message for the ongoing PDU session modification procedure, may send a single PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message to delete the erroneous QoS rules, and optionally to delete the erroneous mapped EPS bearer contexts. The UE shall include a 5GSM cause IE in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message.

NOTE6: The 5GSM cause to use cannot be different from #41 "semantic error in the TFT operation", #42 "syntactical error in the TFT operation", #44 "semantic error in packet filter(s)", #45 "syntactical errors in packet filter(s)", #83 "semantic error in the QoS operation", #84 "syntactical error in the QoS operation", or #85 "Invalid mapped EPS bearer identity". The selection of a 5GSM cause is up to UE implementation.

The UE shall transport the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND REJECT message and the PDU session ID, using the NAS transport procedure as specified in subclause5.4.5.

Upon receipt of a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND REJECT message with 5GSM cause value in state PDU SESSION MODIFICATION PENDING, the SMF shall stop timer T3591, enter the state PDU SESSION ACTIVE and abort the PDU session modification procedure.

6.3.2.5 Abnormal cases on the network side

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a) Expiry of timer T3591.

 On the first expiry of the timer T3591, the SMF shall resend the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message and shall reset and restart timer T3591. This retransmission is repeated four times, i.e. on the fifth expiry of timer T3591, the SMF shall abort the procedure and enter the state PDU SESSION ACTIVE.

 The SMF may continue to use the previous configuration of the PDU session or initiate the network-requested PDU session release procedure. If the SMF decides to continue to use the previous configuration of the PDU session and

i) the Authorized QoS rules IE is included in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message, the SMF may mark the corresponding authorized QoS rule(s) of the PDU session as to be synchronised with the UE; and

ii) the Authorized QoS flow descriptions IE is included in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message, the SMF may mark the corresponding authorized QoS flow description(s) of the PDU session as to be synchronised with the UE.

b) Void.

c) Collision of UE-requested PDU session release procedure and network-requested PDU session modification procedure.

 If the SMF receives a PDU SESSION RELEASE REQUEST message during the network-requested PDU session modification procedure, and the PDU session indicated in the PDU SESSION RELEASE REQUEST message is the PDU session that the SMF had requested to modify, the SMF shall abort the PDU session modification procedure and proceed with the UE-requested PDU session release procedure.

d) Collision of UE-requested PDU session modification procedure and network-requested PDU session modification procedure.

 If the network receives a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message during the network-requested PDU session modification procedure, and the PDU session indicated in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message is the PDU session that the network had requested to modify, the network shall ignore the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message received in the state PDU SESSION MODIFICATION PENDING. The network shall proceed with the network-requested PDU session modification procedure as if no PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message was received from the UE.

e) 5G access network cannot forward the message.

 If the SMF determines based on content of the n2SmInfo attribute specified in 3GPPTS29.502[20A] that the DL NAS TRANSPORT message carrying the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message was not forwarded to the UE by the 5G access network, then the SMF shall abort the procedure and enter the state PDU SESSION ACTIVE.

f) 5G access network cannot forward the message due to handover.

 If the SMF determines based on content of the n2SmInfo attribute specified in 3GPPTS29.502[20A] that the DL NAS TRANSPORT message carrying the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message was not forwarded to the UE by the 5G access network due to handover, then the SMF shall abort the procedure and enter the state PDU SESSION ACTIVE.

 The SMF may re-initiate, up to a pre-configured number of times, the network-requested PDU session modification procedure when the SMF detects that the handover is completed successfully or has failed or at the expiry of the configured guard timer as specified in 3GPPTS23.502[9].

g) Collision of re-establishment of the user-plane resources and network-requested PDU session modification procedure for the same PDU session.

 If the SMF receives an indication from the AMF to re-establish the user-plane resources during the network-requested PDU session modification procedure for the same PDU session, the network shall abort the network-requested PDU session modification procedure and proceed with re-establishment of the user-plane resources for the PDU session as specified in 3GPPTS29.502[20A] subclause5.2.2.3.2.2.

NOTE: After the completion of re-establishment of the user-plane resources for the PDU session, the SMF can re-initiate the network-requested PDU session modification procedure for the PDU session.

h) Collision of UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure and network-requested PDU session modification procedure.

 If the network receives a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message with request type set to "existing PDU session" or "existing emergency PDU session" during the network-requested PDU session modification procedure, and the PDU session ID indicated in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message is the PDU session that the network had requested to modify, the network shall abort the network-requested PDU session modification procedure and proceed with the UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure.

6.3.2.6 Abnormal cases in the UE

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a) PDU session inactive for the received PDU session ID.

 If the PDU session ID in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message belongs to any PDU session in state PDU SESSION INACTIVE in the UE, the UE shall set the 5GSM cause IE to #43 "Invalid PDU session identity" in the 5GSM STATUS message, and set the PDU session ID to the received PDU session ID in the UL NAS TRANSPORT message as specified in subclause5.4.5.

b) Collision of network-requested PDU session modification procedure and UE-requested PDU session modification procedure.

 If the UE receives a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message during the UE-requested PDU session modification procedure, the PTI IE of the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message is set to "No procedure transaction identity assigned", and the PDU session indicated in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message is the PDU session that the UE had requested to modify, the UE shall abort internally the UE-requested PDU session modification procedure, enter the state PDU SESSION ACTIVE and proceed with the network-requested PDU session modification procedure.

6.3.3 Network-requested PDU session release procedure

6.3.3.1 General

The purpose of the network-requested PDU session release procedure is to enable the network to release a PDU session or the user-plane resources on a single access of an MA PDU session.

6.3.3.2 Network-requested PDU session release procedure initiation

In order to initiate the network-requested PDU session release procedure, the SMF shall create a PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message.

The SMF shall set the 5GSM cause IE of the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message to indicate the reason for releasing the PDU session.

The 5GSM cause IE typically indicates one of the following 5GSM cause values:

#8 operator determined barring;

#26 insufficient resources;

#29 user authentication or authorization failed;

#36 regular deactivation;

#38 network failure;

#39 reactivation requested;

#46 out of LADN service area;

#67 insufficient resources for specific slice and DNN;

#69 insufficient resources for specific slice.

If the selected SSC mode of the PDU session is "SSC mode 2" and the SMF requests the relocation of SSC mode 2 PDU session anchor with different PDU sessions as specified in 3GPPTS23.502[9], the SMF shall include 5GSM cause #39"reactivation requested".

If the network-requested PDU session release procedure is triggered by a UE-requested PDU session release procedure, the SMF shall set the PTI IE of the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message to the PTI of the PDU SESSION RELEASE REQUEST message received as part of the UE-requested PDU session release procedure and shall not include the Access type IE in the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND.

If the network-requested PDU session release procedure is not triggered by a UE-requested PDU session release procedure, the SMF shall set the PTI IE of the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message to "No procedure transaction identity assigned".

If the PDU session ID included in PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message is associated with one or more MBS sessions and either the Access type IE is not included or the Access type IE indicates "3GPP access", the SMF shall consider the UE as removed from the associated MBS sessions.

Based on the local policy and user's subscription data, if the SMF decides to release the PDU session after determining:

a) the UE has moved between a tracking area in NB-N1 mode and a tracking area in WB-N1 mode;

b) the UE has moved between a tracking area in NB-S1 mode and a tracking area in WB-N1 mode;

c) the UE has moved between a tracking area in WB-S1 mode and a tracking area in NB-N1 mode; or

d) a PDU session is not only for control plane CIoT 5GS optimization any more,

the SMF shall:

a) include the 5GSM cause value #39 "reactivation requested" in the 5GSM cause IE of the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message; or

b) include a 5GSM cause value other than #39 "reactivation requested" in the 5GSM cause IE of the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message.

NOTE: The included 5GSM cause value is up to the network implementation.

If the SMF receives UE presence in LADN service area from the AMF indicating that the UE is out of the LADN service area and the SMF decides to release the PDU session, the SMF shall include the 5GSM cause value #46 "out of LADN service area" in the 5GSM cause IE of the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message. Upon receipt of the 5GSM cause value #46 "out of LADN service area" in the 5GSM cause IE of the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message, the UE shall release the PDU session.

The SMF may include a Back-off timer value IE in the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message when the 5GSM cause value #26 "insufficient resources" is included in the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message. If the 5GSM cause value is #26 "insufficient resources" and the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message is sent to a UE configured for high priority access in selected PLMN or the request type was set to "initial emergency request" or "existing emergency PDU session" for the establishment of the PDU session, the network shall not include a Back-off timer value IE.

The SMF may include a Back-off timer value IE in the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message when the 5GSM cause value #67 "insufficient resources for specific slice and DNN" is included in the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message. If the 5GSM cause value is #67 "insufficient resources for specific slice and DNN" and the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message is sent to a UE configured for high priority access in selected PLMN or the request type was set to "initial emergency request" or "existing emergency PDU session" for the establishment of the PDU session, the network shall not include a Back-off timer value IE.

The SMF may include a Back-off timer value IE in the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message when the 5GSM cause #69 "insufficient resources for specific slice" is included in the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message. If the 5GSM cause value is #69 "insufficient resources for specific slice" and the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message is sent to a UE configured for high priority access in selected PLMN or the request type was set to "initial emergency request" or "existing emergency PDU session" for the establishment of the PDU session, the network shall not include a Back-off timer value IE.

The SMF should include a Back-off timer value IE in the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message when the 5GSM cause value #29 "user authentication or authorization failed" is included in the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message.

If the service-level-AA procedure is triggered for the established PDU session for UAS services with re-authentication purpose, and the SMF is informed by the UAS-NF that UUAA-SM is unsuccessful or if the SMF receives UUAA revocation notification message from the UAS-NF as described in 3GPPTS23.256[6AB], the SMF shall transmit the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message to the UE, including:

a) the service-level-AA response in the Service-level-AA container IE, with the SLAR field set to the value of "Service level authentication and authorization was not successful or service level authorization is revoked"; and

b) the 5GSM cause value #29 "user authentication or authorization failed" in the 5GSM cause IE of the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message.

If the PDU session was established for C2 communication and the SMF is informed by UAS-NF that C2 authorization is revoked, the SMF shall include:

a) the service-level-AA response with the value of the C2AR field set to the "C2 authorization was not successful or C2 authorization is revoked" in the service-level-AA container IE of the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message, and

b) the 5GSM cause value #29 "user authentication or authorization failed" in the 5GSM cause IE of the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message.

The SMF shall send:

a) the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message; and

b) the N1 SM delivery skip allowed indication:

1) if the SMF allows the AMF to skip sending the N1 SM container to the UE and the 5GSM cause IE is not set to #39"reactivation requested"; or

2) if the SMF allows the AMF to skip sending the N1 SM container to the UE and the Access type IE is not included

towards the AMF, and the SMF shall start timer T3592 (see example in figure6.3.3.2.1).



Figure6.3.3.2.1: Network-requested PDU session release procedure

6.3.3.3 Network-requested PDU session release procedure accepted by the UE

For a single access PDU session, upon receipt of a PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message and a PDU session ID, using the NAS transport procedure as specified in subclause5.4.5, the UE considers the PDU session as released and the UE shall create a PDU SESSION RELEASE COMPLETE message.

For an MA PDU session, upon receipt of the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND, the UE shall behave as follows:

a) if the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND includes the Access type IE and the MA PDU session has user-plane resources established on both 3GPP access and non-3GPP access, the UE shall consider the user-plane resources on the access indicated in the Access type IE as released and shall create a PDU SESSION RELEASE COMPLETE message;

b) if the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND includes the Access type IE and the MA PDU session has user-plane resources established on only the access indicated in the Access type IE, the UE shall consider the MA PDU session as released and shall create a PDU SESSION RELEASE COMPLETE message; and

c) if the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND does not include the Access type IE, the UE shall consider the MA PDU session as released and shall create a PDU SESSION RELEASE COMPLETE message.

If there is one or more MBS multicast sessions associated with the PDU session the UE considers as released, the UE shall locally leave these associated MBS multicast sessions.

If the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message contains the PTI value allocated in the UE-requested PDU session release procedure, the UE shall stop the timer T3582. The UE should ensure that the PTI value assigned to this procedure is not released immediately.

NOTE1: The way to achieve this is implementation dependent. For example, the UE can ensure that the PTI value assigned to this procedure is not released during the time equal to or greater than the default value of timer T3592.

While the PTI value is not released, the UE regards any received PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message with the same PTI value as a network retransmission (see subclause7.3.1).

If the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message includes 5GSM cause #39 "reactivation requested", then after completion of the network-requested PDU session release procedure, the UE should re-initiate the UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure as specified in subclause6.4.1 for:

a) the PDU session type associated with the released PDU session;

b) the SSC mode associated with the released PDU session;

c) the DNN associated with the released PDU session; and

d) the S-NSSAI associated with (if available in roaming scenarios) a mapped S-NSSAI if provided in the UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure of the released PDU session.

NOTE2: User interaction is necessary in some cases when the UE cannot re-initiate the UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure automatically.

If the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message is received without the Back-off timer value IE or includes 5GSM cause#39 "reactivation requested", and the UE provided an S-NSSAI during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall stop timer T3585 if it is running for the S-NSSAI of the PDU session. If the UE did not provide an S-NSSAI during the PDU session establishment and the request type was different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", the UE shall stop the timer T3585 associated with no S-NSSAI if it is running. If the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message was received for an emergency PDU session, the UE shall not stop the timer T3585 associated with no S-NSSAI if it is running. The timer T3585 to be stopped includes the timer T3585 applied for all the PLMNs, if running, and the timer T3585 applied for the registered PLMN, if running.

If the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message is received without the Back-off timer value IE or includes 5GSM cause#39 "reactivation requested", and the UE provided a DNN during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall stop timer T3396 if it is running for the DNN provided by the UE. If the UE did not provide a DNN during the PDU session establishment and the request type was different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", the UE shall stop the timer T3396 associated with no DNN if it is running. If the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message was received for an emergency PDU session, the UE shall not stop the timer T3396 associated with no DNN if it is running.

If the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message is received without the Back-off timer value IE or includes 5GSM cause#39 "reactivation requested", and the UE provided an S-NSSAI and a DNN during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall stop timer T3584 if it is running for the [S-NSSAI of the PDU session, DNN] combination provided by the UE. If the UE did not provide an S-NSSAI during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall stop the timer T3584 associated with [no S-NSSAI, DNN] if it is running. If the UE did not provide a DNN during the PDU session establishment and the request type was different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", the UE shall stop the timer T3584 associated with [S-NSSAI of the PDU session, no DNN] combination, if it is running. If the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message was received for an emergency PDU session, the UE shall not stop the timer T3584 associated with [S-NSSAI of the PDU session, no DNN] if it is running. If the UE provided neither a DNN nor an S-NSSAI during the PDU session establishment and the request type was different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", the UE shall stop the timer T3584 associated with [no S-NSSAI, no DNN] if it is running. If the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message was received for an emergency PDU session, the UE shall not stop the timer T3584 associated with [no S-NSSAI, no DNN] if it is running. The timer T3584 to be stopped includes the timer T3584 applied for all the PLMNs, if running, and the timer T3584 applied for the registered PLMN, if running.

NOTE3: If the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message is received without the Back-off timer value IE or includes 5GSM cause#39 "reactivation requested" for a PDU session, the UE provided a DNN (or no DNN) and an S-NSSAI (or no S-NSSAI) when the PDU session is established, timer T3396 associated with the DNN (or no DNN, if no DNN was provided by the UE) is running, and timer T3584 associated with the DNN (or no DNN, if no DNN was provided by the UE) and the S-NSSAI of the PDU session (or no S-NSSAI, if no S-NSSAI was provided by the UE) is running, then the UE stops both the timer T3396 and the timer T3584.

NOTE4: If the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message is received without the Back-off timer value IE or includes 5GSM cause#39 "reactivation requested" for a PDU session, the UE provided a DNN (or no DNN) and an S-NSSAI of the PDU session (or no S-NSSAI) when the PDU session is established, timer T3585 associated with the S-NSSAI of the PDU session (or no S-NSSAI, if no S-NSSAI was provided by the UE) is running, and timer T3584 associated with the DNN (or no DNN, if no DNN was provided by the UE) and the S-NSSAI of the PDU session (or no S-NSSAI, if no S-NSSAI was provided by the UE) is running, then the UE stops both the timer T3585 and the timer T3584.

If the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message includes 5GSM cause#26 "insufficient resources" and the Back-off timer value IE, the UE shall ignore the 5GSM congestion re-attempt indicator IE provided by the network, if any, and the UE shall take different actions depending on the timer value received for timer T3396 in the Back-off timer value:

a) If the timer value indicates neither zero nor deactivated and a DNN was provided during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall stop timer T3396 associated with the corresponding DNN, if it is running. If the timer value indicates neither zero nor deactivated and no DNN was provided during the PDU session establishment and the request type was different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", the UE shall stop timer T3396 associated with no DNN if it is running. The UE shall then start timer T3396 with the value provided in the Back-off timer value IE and:

1) shall not send a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message or PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with exception of those identified in subclause6.4.2.1, for the same DNN that was sent by the UE, until timer T3396 expires or timer T3396 is stopped; and

2) shall not send a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message without an DNN and with request type different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", or a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with exception of those identified in subclause6.4.2.1, for a non-emergency PDU session established without an DNN provided by the UE, if no DNN was provided during the PDU session establishment and the request type was different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", until timer T3396 expires or timer T3396 is stopped.

The UE shall not stop timer T3396 upon a PLMN change or inter-system change;

b) if the timer value indicates that this timer is deactivated and a DNN was provided during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall stop timer T3396 associated with the corresponding DNN, if it is running. If the timer value indicates that this timer is deactivated and no DNN was provided during the PDU session establishment and the request type was different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", the UE shall stop timer T3396 associated with no DNN if it is running. The UE:

1) shall not send a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message or PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with exception of those identified in subclause6.4.2.1, for the same DNN until the UE is switched off, the USIM is removed, the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated, or the UE receives a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message for the same DNN from the network, or a PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message for the same DNN, or a PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message without the Back-off timer value IE or including 5GSM cause#39 "reactivation requested" for the same DNN from the network; and

2) shall not send a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message without a DNN and with request type different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", or a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with exception of those identified in subclause6.4.2.1, for a non-emergency PDU session established without a DNN provided by the UE, if no DNN was provided during the PDU session establishment and the request type was different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", until the UE is switched off, the USIM is removed, the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated, or the UE receives a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message for a non-emergency PDU session established without an DNN provided by the UE, or a PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message for a non-emergency PDU session established without a DNN provided by the UE, or a PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message without the Back-off timer value IE or including 5GSM cause#39 "reactivation requested" for a non-emergency PDU session established without a DNN provided by the UE.

The timer T3396 remains deactivated upon a PLMN change or inter-system change; and

c) if the timer value indicates zero, the UE:

1) shall stop timer T3396 associated with the corresponding DNN, if running, and may send a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message or PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message for the same DNN; and

2) if no DNN was provided during the PDU session establishment and the request type was different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", the UE shall stop timer T3396 associated with no DNN, if running, and may send a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message without a DNN, or a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message without an DNN provided by the UE.

If the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message includes 5GSM cause#26 "insufficient resources" and the Back-off timer value IE is not included, then the UE may send a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message or PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message for the same DNN or without a DNN.

When the timer T3396 is running or the timer is deactivated, the UE is allowed to initiate a PDU session establishment procedure for emergency services.

If the timer T3396 is running when the UE enters state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED, the UE remains switched on, and the USIM in the UE (if any) remains the same and the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the SNPN to which timer T3396 is associated (if any) is not updated, then timer T3396 is kept running until it expires or it is stopped.

If the UE is switched off when the timer T3396 is running, and if the USIM in the UE (if any) remains the same and the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the SNPN to which timer T3396 is associated (if any) is not updated when the UE is switched on, the UE shall behave as follows:

- let t1 be the time remaining for T3396 timeout at switch off and let t be the time elapsed between switch off and switch on. If t1 is greater than t, then the timer shall be restarted with the value t1  t. If t1 is equal to or less than t, then the timer need not be restarted. If the UE is not capable of determining t, then the UE shall restart the timer with the value t1.

If the 5GSM cause value is #39 "reactivation requested", the UE shall ignore the Back-off timer value IE and 5GSM congestion re-attempt indicator IE provided by the network, if any.

If the 5GSM cause value is #67 "insufficient resources for specific slice and DNN" and the Back-off timer value IE is included, the UE shall take different actions depending on the timer value received for timer T3584 in the Back-off timer value:

a) If the timer value indicates neither zero nor deactivated, and both an S-NSSAI and a DNN were provided by the UE during the PDU session establishment the UE shall stop timer T3584 associated with the [S-NSSAI of the PDU session, DNN] combination, if it is running. If the timer value indicates neither zero nor deactivated, an S-NSSAI and no DNN was provided during the PDU session establishment and the request type was different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", the UE shall stop timer T3584 associated with [S-NSSAI of the PDU session, no DNN] combination, if it is running. If the timer value indicates neither zero nor deactivated, no S-NSSAI and a DNN was provided during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall stop timer T3584 associated with the [no S-NSSAI, DNN] combination, if it is running. If the timer value indicates neither zero nor deactivated and neither S-NSSAI nor DNN was provided during the PDU session establishment and the request type was different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", the UE shall stop timer T3584 associated with the [no S-NSSAI, no DNN] combination, if it is running. The timer T3584 to be stopped includes the timer T3584 applied for all the PLMNs, if running, and the timer T3584 applied for the registered PLMN, if running. The UE shall then start timer T3584 with the value provided in the Back-off timer value IE.

1) The UE shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message with request type different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", or PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with the exception of those identified in subclause6.4.2.1, for the [S-NSSAI of the PDU session, DNN] combination, until timer T3584 expires or timer T3584 is stopped;

2) shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message with request type different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", or another PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with the exception of those identified in subclause6.4.2.1, for the [S-NSSAI of the PDU session, no DNN] combination, if no DNN was provided during the PDU session establishment, until timer T3584 expires or timer T3584 is stopped;

3) shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message, or another PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with the exception of those identified in subclause6.4.2.1, for the same [no S-NSSAI, DNN] combination, if no S-NSSAI was provided during the PDU session establishment, until timer T3584 expires or timer T3584 is stopped; and

4) shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message with request type different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", or another PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with the exception of those identified in subclause6.4.2.1, for the same [no S-NSSAI, no DNN] combination, if neither S-NSSAI nor DNN was provided during the PDU session establishment, until timer T3584 expires or timer T3584 is stopped.

The UE shall not stop timer T3584 upon a PLMN change or inter-system change;

b) if the timer value indicates that this timer is deactivated:

1) if both S-NSSAI and DNN were provided by the UE during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall stop timer T3584 associated with the [S-NSSAI of the PDU session, DNN] combination (including the timer T3584 applied for all the PLMNs, if running, and the timer T3584 applied for the registered PLMN, if running), if it is running. The UE shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message with request type different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", or PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with exception of those identified in subclause6.4.2.1, for the [S-NSSAI of the PDU session, DNN] combination that was sent by the UE, until the UE is switched off, the USIM is removed, the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated, or the UE receives a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message for the [S-NSSAI of the PDU session, DNN] combination from the network, or a PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message for the [S-NSSAI of the PDU session, DNN] combination from the network, or a PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message without the Back-off timer value IE or including 5GSM cause#39 "reactivation requested" for the [S-NSSAI of the PDU session, DNN] combination from the network;

2) if an S-NSSAI was provided but a DNN was not provided by the UE during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall stop timer T3584 associated with the [S-NSSAI of the PDU session, no DNN] combination (including the timer T3584 applied for all the PLMNs, if running, and the timer T3584 applied for the registered PLMN, if running), if it is running. The UE shall not send a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message with request type different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", or a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with exception of those identified in subclause6.4.2.1, for the [S-NSSAI of the PDU session, no DNN] combination, if no DNN was provided during the PDU session establishment, until the UE is switched off, the USIM is removed, the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated, or the UE receives an PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message for a non-emergency PDU session established for the [S-NSSAI of the PDU session, no DNN] combination from the network, or a PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message for a non-emergency PDU session established the [S-NSSAI of the PDU session, DNN] combination from the network, or a PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message without the Back-off timer value IE or including 5GSM cause#39 "reactivation requested" for a non-emergency PDU session established for the [S-NSSAI of the PDU session, no DNN] combination from the network;

3) if an S-NSSAI was not provided but a DNN was provided by the UE during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall stop timer T3584 associated with the [no S-NSSAI, DNN] combination (including the timer T3584 applied for all the PLMNs, if running, and the timer T3584 applied for the registered PLMN, if running), if it is running. The UE shall not send a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message, or a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with exception of those identified in subclause6.4.2.1, for the [no S-NSSAI, DNN], if no S-NSSAI was provided during the PDU session establishment, until the UE is switched off, the USIM is removed, the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated, or the UE receives an PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message for the [no S-NSSAI, DNN] combination from the network, or a PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message for the [no S-NSSAI, DNN] combination from the network, or a PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message without the Back-off timer value IE or including 5GSM cause#39 "reactivation requested" for the same [no S-NSSAI, DNN] combination from the network; and

4) if neither S-NSSAI nor DNN were provided by the UE during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall stop timer T3584 associated with the [no S-NSSAI, no DNN] combination (including the timer T3584 applied for all the PLMNs, if running, and the timer T3584 applied for the registered PLMN, if running), if it is running. The UE shall not send a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message with request type different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", or a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with exception of those identified in subclause6.4.2.1, for the [no S-NSSAI, no DNN] combination, if neither S-NSSAI nor DNN was provided during the PDU session establishment, until the UE is switched off, the USIM is removed, the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated, or the UE receives an PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message for a non-emergency PDU session established for the [no S-NSSAI, no DNN] combination from the network, or a PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message for a non-emergency PDU session established for the [no S-NSSAI, no DNN] combination from the network or a PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message without the Back-off timer value IE or including 5GSM cause#39 "reactivation requested" for a non-emergency PDU session established for the [no S-NSSAI, no DNN] combination from the network.

The timer T3584 remains deactivated upon a PLMN change or inter-system change; and

c) if the timer value indicates zero:

1) if both S-NSSAI and DNN were provided by the UE during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall stop timer T3584 associated with the [S-NSSAI of the PDU session, DNN] combination (including the timer T3584 applied for all the PLMNs, if running, and the timer T3584 applied for the registered PLMN, if running), if running, and may send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message or PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message for the [S-NSSAI of the PDU session, DNN] combination;

2) if an S-NSSAI was provided but a DNN was not provided by the UE during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall stop timer T3584 associated with the [S-NSSAI of the PDU session, no DNN] combination (including the timer T3584 applied for all the PLMNs, if running, and the timer T3584 applied for the registered PLMN, if running), if it is running. The UE may send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message or PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message for the [S-NSSAI of the PDU session, no DNN] combination if the request type was different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session";

3) if an S-NSSAI was not provided but a DNN was provided by the UE during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall stop timer T3584 associated with the [no S-NSSAI, DNN] combination (including the timer T3584 applied for all the PLMNs, if running, and the timer T3584 applied for the registered PLMN, if running), if it is running. The UE may send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message, or PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message for the [no S-NSSAI, DNN] combination; and

4) if neither S-NSSAI nor DNN were provided by the UE during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall stop timer T3584 associated with the [no S-NSSAI, no DNN] combination (including the timer T3584 applied for all the PLMNs, if running, and the timer T3584 applied for the registered PLMN, if running), if it is running. The UE may send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message, or PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message for the [no S-NSSAI, no DNN] combination if the request type was different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session".

If the 5GSM congestion re-attempt indicator IE with the ABO bit set to "The back-off timer is applied in all PLMNs" is included in the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message with the 5GSM cause value #67 "insufficient resources for specific slice and DNN", then the UE shall apply the timer T3584 for all the PLMNs. Otherwise, the UE shall apply the timer T3584 for the registered PLMN.

If the 5GSM cause value is #67 "insufficient resources for specific slice and DNN" and the Back-off timer value IE is not included, then the UE may send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message or PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message for the same [S-NSSAI, DNN] combination.

When the timer T3584 is running or the timer is deactivated, the UE is allowed to initiate a PDU session establishment procedure for emergency services.

If the timer T3584 is running when the UE enters state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED, the UE remains switched on, and the USIM in the UE (if any) remains the same and the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the SNPN to which timer T3584 is associated (if any) is not updated, then timer T3584 is kept running until it expires or it is stopped.

If the UE is switched off when the timer T3584 is running, and if the USIM in the UE (if any) remains the same and the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the SNPN to which timer T3584 is associated (if any) is not updated when the UE is switched on, the UE shall behave as follows:

- let t1 be the time remaining for T3584 timeout at switch off and let t be the time elapsed between switch off and switch on. If t1 is greater than t, then the timer shall be restarted with the value t1  t. If t1 is equal to or less than t, then the timer need not be restarted. If the UE is not capable of determining t, then the UE shall restart the timer with the value t1.

If the 5GSM cause value is #69 "insufficient resources for specific slice" and the Back-off timer value IE is included, the UE shall take different actions depending on the timer value received for timer T3585 in the Back-off timer value:

a) If the timer value indicates neither zero nor deactivated and an S-NSSAI was provided during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall stop timer T3585 associated with the S-NSSAI of the PDU session, if it is running. If the timer value indicates neither zero nor deactivated and no S-NSSAI was provided during the PDU session establishment and the request type was different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", the UE shall stop timer T3585 associated with no S-NSSAI if it is running. The timer T3585 to be stopped includes the timer T3585 applied for all the PLMNs, if running, and the timer T3585 applied for the registered PLMN, if running. The UE shall then start timer T3585 with the value provided in the Back-off timer value IE and:

1) if an S-NSSAI was provided by the UE during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message, or PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with exception of those identified in subclause6.4.2.1, for the S-NSSAI of the PDU session, until timer T3585 expires or timer T3585 is stopped; and

2) if the request type was different from "initial emergency request" and from "existing emergency PDU session", and an S-NSSAI was not provided by the UE during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message without an S-NSSAI and with request type different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", or another PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with exception of those identified in subclause6.4.2.1, for a non-emergency PDU session established without an S-NSSAI provided by the UE, until timer T3585 expires or timer T3585 is stopped.

The UE shall not stop timer T3585 upon a PLMN change or inter-system change;

b) if the timer value indicates that this timer is deactivated and an S-NSSAI was provided during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall stop timer T3585 associated with the S-NSSAI of the PDU session, if it is running. If the timer value indicates that this timer is deactivated and no S-NSSAI was provided during the PDU session establishment and the request type was different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", the UE shall stop timer T3585 associated with no S-NSSAI if it is running. The timer T3585 to be stopped includes the timer T3585 applied for all the PLMNs, if running, and the timer T3585 applied for the registered PLMN, if running. In addition:

1) if an S-NSSAI was provided by the UE during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST, or PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST with exception of those identified in subclause6.4.2.1, for the S-NSSAI of the PDU session until the UE is switched off, the USIM is removed, the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated, or a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message for the S-NSSAI of the PDU session from the network, or a PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message for the S-NSSAI of the PDU session from the network, or a PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message without the Back-off timer value IE or including 5GSM cause#39 "reactivation requested" for the S-NSSAI of the PDU session from the network; and

2) if the request type was different from "initial emergency request" and from "existing emergency PDU session", and an S-NSSAI was not provided by the UE during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message without an S-NSSAI and with request type different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", or another PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with exception of those identified in subclause6.4.2.1, for a non-emergency PDU session established without an S-NSSAI provided by the UE, , until the UE is switched off, the USIM is removed, the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated, or a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message for a non-emergency PDU session established without an S-NSSAI provided by the UE, or a PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message for a non-emergency PDU session established without an S-NSSAI provided by the UE, or a PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message without the Back-off timer value IE or including 5GSM cause#39 "reactivation requested" for a non-emergency PDU session established without an S-NSSAI provided by the UE.

The timer T3585 remains deactivated upon a PLMN change or inter-system change; and

c) if the timer value indicates zero:

1) if an S-NSSAI was provided by the UE during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall stop timer T3585 associated with the S-NSSAI of the PDU session (including the timer T3585 applied for all the PLMNs, if running, and the timer T3585 applied for the registered PLMN, if running), if running, and may send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST, or PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message for the S-NSSAI of the PDU session; and

2) if no S-NSSAI was provided during the PDU session establishment and the request type was different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", the UE shall stop timer T3585 associated with no S-NSSAI (including the timer T3585 applied for all the PLMNs, if running, and the timer T3585 applied for the registered PLMN, if running), if running, and may send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message without an S-NSSAI, or another PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message without an S-NSSAI provided by the UE.

If the 5GSM congestion re-attempt indicator IE with the ABO bit set to "The back-off timer is applied in all PLMNs" is included in the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message with the 5GSM cause value #69 "insufficient resources for specific slice", then the UE shall apply the timer T3585 for all the PLMNs. Otherwise, the UE shall apply the timer T3585 for the registered PLMN.

If the 5GSM cause value is #69 "insufficient resources for specific slice" and the Back-off timer value IE is not included, then the UE may send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message or PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message for the same S-NSSAI or without an S-NSSAI.

When the timer T3585 is running or the timer is deactivated, the UE is allowed to initiate a PDU session establishment procedure for emergency services.

If the timer T3585 is running when the UE enters state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED, the UE remains switched on, and the USIM in the UE (if any) remains the same and the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the SNPN to which timer T3585 is associated (if any) is not updated, then timer T3585 is kept running until it expires or it is stopped.

If the UE is switched off when the timer T3585 is running, and if the USIM in the UE (if any) remains the same and the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the SNPN to which timer T3585 is associated (if any) is not updated when the UE is switched on, the UE shall behave as follows:

- let t1 be the time remaining for T3585 timeout at switch off and let t be the time elapsed between switch off and switch on. If t1 is greater than t, then the timer shall be restarted with the value t1  t. If t1 is equal to or less than t, then the timer need not be restarted. If the UE is not capable of determining t, then the UE shall restart the timer with the value t1.

NOTE5: As described in this subclause, upon PLMN change or inter-system change, the UE does not stop the timer T3584 or T3585. This means the timer T3584 or T3585 can still be running or be deactivated for the given 5GSM procedure, the PLMN, the S-NSSAI and optionally the DNN combination when the UE returns to the PLMN or when it performs inter-system change back from S1 mode to N1 mode. Thus the UE can still be prevented from sending another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST or PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message in the PLMN for the same S-NSSAI and optionally the same DNN.

Upon PLMN change, if T3584 is running or is deactivated for an S-NSSAI, a DNN, and old PLMN, but T3584 is not running and is not deactivated for the S-NSSAI, the DNN, and new PLMN, then the UE is allowed to send a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message for the same S-NSSAI and the same DNN in the new PLMN.

Upon PLMN change, if T3585 is running or is deactivated for an S-NSSAI and old PLMN, but T3585 is not running and is not deactivated for the S-NSSAI and new PLMN, then the UE is allowed to send a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message for the same S-NSSAI in the new PLMN.

If the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message includes 5GSM cause #29 "user authentication or authorization failed "and the Back-off timer value IE, the UE shall behave as follows:

a) if the timer value indicates neither zero nor deactivated and:

1) if the UE provided a DNN and S-NSSAI to the network during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall start the back-off timer with the value provided in the Back-off timer value IE for the PDU session establishment procedure and [PLMN, DNN, (mapped) HPLMN S-NSSAI] combination. The UE shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message for the same DNN and (mapped) HPLMN S-NSSAI in the current PLMN, until the back-off timer expires, the UE is switched off, the USIM is removed, or the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated if the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, or the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" is updated if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder;

2) if the UE provided a DNN to the network during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall start the back-off timer with the value provided in the Back-off timer value IE for the PDU session establishment procedure and [PLMN, DNN] combination. The UE shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message for the same DNN in the current PLMN, until the back-off timer expires, the UE is switched off, the USIM is removed, or the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated if the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, or the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" is updated if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder;

3) if the UE did not provide a DNN or S-NSSAI or any of the two parameters to the network during the PDU session establishment, it shall start the back-off timer accordingly for the PDU session establishment procedure and the [PLMN, DNN, no S-NSSAI], [PLMN, no DNN, (mapped) HPLMN S-NSSAI] or [PLMN, no DNN, no S-NSSAI] combination. Dependent on the combination, the UE shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message for the same [PLMN, DNN, no S-NSSAI], [PLMN, no DNN, (mapped) HPLMN S-NSSAI] or [PLMN, no DNN, no S-NSSAI] combination in the current PLMN, until the back-off timer expires, the UE is switched off, the USIM is removed, or the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated if the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, or the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" is updated if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder; or

4) if the UE did not provide a DNN to the network during the PDU session establishment, it shall start the back-off timer accordingly for the PDU session establishment procedure and the [PLMN, no DNN] combination. The UE shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message for the same [PLMN, no DNN] in the current PLMN, until the back-off timer expires, the UE is switched off, the USIM is removed, or the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated if the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, or the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" is updated if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder;

b) if the timer value indicates that this timer is deactivated and:

1) if the UE provided a DNN and S-NSSAI to the network during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message for the same DNN and (mapped) HPLMN S-NSSAI in the current PLMN, until the UE is switched off, the USIM is removed, or the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated if the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, or the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" is updated if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder;

2) if the UE provided a DNN to the network during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message for the same DNN in the current PLMN, until the UE is switched off, the USIM is removed, or the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated if the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, or the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" is updated if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder;

3) if the UE did not provide a DNN or S-NSSAI or any of the two parameters to the network during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message for the same [PLMN, DNN, no S-NSSAI], [PLMN, no DNN, (mapped) HPLMN S-NSSAI] or [PLMN, no DNN, no S-NSSAI] combination in the current PLMN, until the UE is switched off, the USIM is removed, or the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated if the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, or the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" is updated if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder; or

4) if the UE did not provide a DNN to the network during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message for the same [PLMN, no DNN] in the current PLMN, until the UE is switched off, the USIM is removed, or the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated if the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, or the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" is updated if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder; and

c) if the timer value indicates zero, the UE may send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message for the same combination of [PLMN, DNN, (mapped) HPLMN S-NSSAI], [PLMN, DNN, no S-NSSAI], [PLMN, no DNN, (mapped) HPLMN S-NSSAI], or [PLMN, no DNN, no S-NSSAI] in the current PLMN.

The UE shall not stop any back-off timer:

a) upon a PLMN change;

b) upon an inter-system change; or

c) upon registration over another access type.

If the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message includes:

a) 5GSM cause #29 "user authentication or authorization failed"; and

b) the service-level-AA response in the Service-level-AA container IE with the SLAR field set to the value of "Service level authentication and authorization was not successful or service level authorization is revoked",

the UE shall forward the service-level-AA response to the upper layers, so the UUAA authorization data is deleted as specified in 3GPPTS33.256[24B].

The UE shall transport the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMPLETE message and the PDU session ID, using the NAS transport procedure as specified in subclause5.4.5.

Upon receipt of a PDU SESSION RELEASE COMPLETE message, the SMF shall stop timer T3592 and shall consider the PDU session as released.

6.3.3.4 N1 SM delivery skipped

If the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message was sent along the N1 SM delivery skip allowed indication towards AMF, then upon receipt of an indication that N1 SM delivery was skipped, the SMF shall stop timer T3592 and shall consider the PDU session as released.

6.3.3.5 Abnormal cases on the network side

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a) Expiry of timer T3592.

 The SMF shall, on the first expiry of the timer T3592, retransmit the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message and shall reset and start timer T3592. This retransmission is repeated four times, i.e. on the fifth expiry of timer T3592, the SMF shall abort the procedure.

b) Collision of network-requested PDU session release procedure and UE-requested PDU session modification procedure.

 When the SMF receives a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message during the network-requested PDU session release procedure, and the PDU session indicated in PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message is the PDU session that the SMF had requested to release, the SMF shall ignore the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message and proceed with the PDU session release procedure.

c) Collision of network-requested PDU session release procedure and UE-requested PDU session release procedure.

 If the SMF receives a PDU SESSION RELEASE REQUEST message after sending a PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message to the UE, and the PDU session ID in the PDU SESSION RELEASE REQUEST message is the same as the PDU session ID in the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message, the SMF shall ignore the PDU SESSION RELEASE REQUEST message and proceed with the network-requested PDU session release procedure.

d) Collision of re-establishment of the user-plane resources and network-requested PDU session release procedure for the same PDU session.

 If the SMF receives an indication from the AMF to re-establish the user-plane resources during the network-requested PDU session release procedure for the same PDU session, the SMF shall not re-establish the user-plane resources for the PDU session as specified in 3GPPTS29.502[20A] subclause5.2.2.3.2.2 and proceed with the network-requested PDU session release procedure.

6.3.3.6 Abnormal cases in the UE

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a) PDU session inactive for the received PDU session ID.

 If the PDU session ID in the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message belongs to any PDU session in state PDU SESSION INACTIVE in the UE, the UE shall include the 5GSM cause #43 "Invalid PDU session identity" in the 5GSM STATUS message, and set the PDU session ID to the received PDU session ID in the UL NAS TRANSPORT message as specified in subclause5.4.5.

b) User-plane resources of the MA PDU session on the access indicated in the Access type IE not established.

 If the PDU session is an MA PDU session and has user-plane resources established on a single access different from the access indicated in the Access type IE, the UE shall not diagnose an error, further process the release command and consider the user-plane resources of the MA PDU session on the access indicated in the Access type IE as successfully released.

6.4 UE-requested 5GSM procedures

6.4.1 UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure

6.4.1.1 General

The purpose of the UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure is to establish a new PDU session with a DN, to perform handover of an existing PDU session between 3GPP access and non-3GPP access, to transfer an existing PDN connection in the EPS to the 5GS, to transfer an existing PDN connection in an untrusted non-3GPP access connected to the EPC to the 5GS, or to establish an MA PDU session to support ATSSS (see 3GPPTS24.193[13B]), or to relay the service associated with the RSC for 5G ProSe layer-3 UE-to-network relay (see 3GPPTS24.554[19E]). If accepted by the network, the PDU session enables exchange of PDUs between the UE and the DN.

The UE shall not request a PDU session establishment:

a) for an LADN when the UE is located outside the LADN service area;

b) to transfer a PDU session from non-3GPP access to 3GPP access when the 3GPP PS data off UE status is "activated" and the UE is not using the PDU session to send uplink IP packets for any of the 3GPP PS data off exempt services (see subclause6.2.10);

c) when the UE is in NB-N1 mode, the UE has indicated preference for user plane CIoT 5GS optimization, the network has accepted the use of user plane CIoT 5GS optimization for the UE, and the number of PDU sessions that currently has user-plane resources established equals to the UE's maximum number of supported user-plane resources;

d) to transfer a PDU session from 3GPP access to non-3GPP access when the UE has indicated preference for control plane CIoT 5GS optimization, the network has accepted the use of control plane CIoT 5GS optimization for the UE, and the Control plane only indication IE was received in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message; or

e) to transfer a PDU session from the non-3GPP access to the 3GPP access when the UE is in NB-N1 mode, the UE has indicated preference for user plane CIoT 5GS optimization, the network has accepted the use of user plane CIoT 5GS optimization for the UE, and the number of PDU sessions that currently has user-plane resources established equals to the UE's maximum number of supported user-plane resources.

6.4.1.2 UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure initiation

In order to initiate the UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure, the UE shall create a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message.

NOTE0: When IMS voice is available over either 3GPP access or non-3GPP access, the "voice centric" UE in 5GMM-REGISTERED state will receive a request from upper layers to establish the PDU session for IMS signalling, if the conditions for performing an initial registration with IMS indicated in 3GPPTS24.229[14]subclauseU.3.1.2 are satisfied.

If the UE requests to establish a new PDU session, the UE shall allocate a PDU session ID which is not currently being used by another PDU session over either 3GPP access or non-3GPP access. If the N5CW device supports 3GPP access and requests to establish a new PDU session via 3GPP access, the N5CW device shall refrain from allocating "PDU session identity value 15". If the TWIF acting on behalf of the N5CW device requests to establish a new PDU session, the TWIF acting on behalf of the N5CW device shall allocate the "PDU session identity value 15".

The UE shall allocate a PTI value currently not used and shall set the PTI IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message to the allocated PTI value.

If the UE is registered for emergency services over the current access, the UE shall not request establishing a non-emergency PDU session over the current access. If the UE is registered for emergency services over the current access it shall not request establishing an emergency PDU session over the non-current access except if the request is for transferring the emergency PDU session to the non-current access. Before transferring an emergency PDU session from non-3GPP access to 3GPP access, or before transferring a PDN connection for emergency bearer services from untrusted non-3GPP access connected to EPC to 3GPP access, the UE shall check whether emergency services are supported in the NG-RAN cell (either an NR cell or an E-UTRA cell) on which the UE is camping.

NOTE1: Transfer of an existing emergency PDU session or PDN connection for emergency bearer services between 3GPP access and non-3GPP access is needed e.g. if the UE determines that the current access is no longer available.

If the UE requests to establish a new emergency PDU session, the UE shall include the PDU session type IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message and shall set the IE to the IP version capability as specified in subclause6.2.4.2.

If the UE requests to establish a new non-emergency PDU session with a DN, the UE shall include the PDU session type IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message and shall set the IE to one of the following values: the IP version capability as specified in subclause6.2.4.2, "Ethernet" or "Unstructured" based on the URSP rules or based on UE local configuration (see 3GPPTS24.526[19]).

NOTE2: When the UE initiates the UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure to transfer an existing non-IP PDN connection in the EPS to the 5GS, the UE can use locally available information associated with the PDN connection to select the PDU session type between "Ethernet" and "Unstructured".

If the UE requests to establish a new non-emergency PDU session with a DN and the UE requests an SSC mode, the UE shall set the SSC mode IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message to the SSC mode. If the UE requests to establish a PDU session of "IPv4", "IPv6" or "IPv4v6" PDU session type, the UE shall either omit the SSC mode IE or set the SSC mode IE to "SSC mode 1", "SSC mode 2", or "SSC mode 3". If the UE requests to establish a PDU session of "Ethernet" or "Unstructured" PDU session type, the UE shall either omit the SSC mode IE or set the SSC mode IE to "SSC mode 1" or "SSC mode 2". If the UE requests transfer of an existing PDN connection in the EPS to the 5GS or the UE requests transfer of an existing PDN connection in an untrusted non-3GPP access connected to the EPC to the 5GS, the UE shall set the SSC mode IE to "SSC mode 1".

If the UE requests to establish a new emergency PDU session, the UE shall set the SSC mode IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message to "SSC mode 1".

A UE supporting PDU connectivity service shall support SSC mode 1 and may support SSC mode 2 and SSC mode 3 as specified in 3GPPTS23.501[8].

If the UE requests to establish a new non-emergency PDU session with a DN, the UE may include the SM PDU DN request container IE with a DN-specific identity of the UE complying with network access identifier (NAI) format as specified in IETFRFC7542[37].

NOTE3: The UE can avoid including both the SM PDU DN request container IE and the extended protocol configuration options IE with PAP/CHAP protocol identifiers in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message. The way to achieve this is implementation dependent.

If the UE requests to establish a new PDU session associated with MBS multicast sessions and the UE at the same time intends to join one or more MBS multicast sessions, the UE should include the Requested MBS container IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message. In that case, the UE shall set the MBS operation to "Join MBS session" and include the MBS session information(s) and shall set the Type of MBS session ID for each of the MBS session information to either "Temporary Mobile Group Identity (TMGI)" or "Source specific IP multicast address" depending on the type of the MBS session ID available in the UE. Then the remaining values of each of the MBS session information shall be set as following:

a) if the Type of MBS session ID is set to "Temporary Mobile Group Identity (TMGI)", the UE shall set the MBS session ID to the TMGI; or

b) if the Type of MBS session ID is set to "Source specific IP multicast address for IPv4" or " Source specific IP multicast address for IPv6", the UE shall set the Source IP address information and the Destination IP address information to the corresponding values.

NOTE4: The UE obtains the details of the MBS session ID(s) i.e. TMGI, Source IP address information and Destination IP address information as a pre-configuration in the UE or during the MBS service announcement, which is out of scope of this specification.

The UE should set the RQoS bit to "Reflective QoS supported" in the 5GSM capability IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message if the UE supports reflective QoS and:

a) the UE requests to establish a new PDU session of "IPv4", "IPv6", "IPv4v6" or "Ethernet" PDU session type;

b) the UE requests to transfer an existing PDN connection in the EPS of "IPv4", "IPv6", "IPv4v6" or "Ethernet" PDN type or of "Non-IP" PDN type mapping to "Ethernet" PDU session type, to the 5GS; or

c) the UE requests to transfer an existing PDN connection in an untrusted non-3GPP access connected to the EPC of "IPv4", "IPv6" or "IPv4v6" PDN type to the 5GS.

NOTE5: The determination to not request the usage of reflective QoS by the UE for a PDU session is implementation dependent.

The UE shall indicate the maximum number of packet filters that can be supported for the PDU session in the Maximum number of supported packet filters IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message if:

a) the UE requests to establish a new PDU session of "IPv4", "IPv6", "IPv4v6", or "Ethernet" PDU session type, and the UE can support more than 16 packet filters for this PDU session;

b) the UE requests to transfer an existing PDN connection in the EPS of "IPv4", "IPv6", "IPv4v6", or "Ethernet" PDN type or of "Non-IP" PDN type mapping to "Ethernet" PDU session type, to the 5GS and the UE can support more than 16 packet filters for this PDU session; or

c) the UE requests to transfer an existing PDN connection in an untrusted non-3GPP access connected to the EPC of "IPv4", "IPv6" or "IPv4v6" PDN type to the 5GS and the UE can support more than 16 packet filters for this PDU session.

The UE shall include the Integrity protection maximum data rate IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message to indicate the maximum data rate per UE for user-plane integrity protection supported by the UE for uplink and the maximum data rate per UE for user-plane integrity protection supported by the UE for downlink.

The UE shall set the MH6-PDU bit to "Multi-homed IPv6 PDU session supported" in the 5GSM capability IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message if the UE supports multi-homed IPv6 PDU session and:

a) the UE requests to establish a new PDU session of "IPv6" or "IPv4v6" PDU session type; or.

b) the UE requests to transfer an existing PDN connection of "IPv6" or "IPv4v6" PDN type in the EPS or in an untrusted non-3GPP access connected to the EPC to the 5GS.

The UE shall set the EPT-S1 bit to "Ethernet PDN type in S1 mode supported" in the 5GSM capability IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message if the UE supports Ethernet PDN type in S1 mode and requests "Ethernet" PDU session type.

If the UE requests to establish a new PDU session as an always-on PDU session (e.g. because the PDU session is for time synchronization or TSC), the UE shall include the Always-on PDU session requested IE and set the value of the IE to "Always-on PDU session requested" in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message.

NOTE6: Determining whether a PDU session is for time synchronization or TSC is UE implementation dependent.

If the UE has an emergency PDU session, the UE shall not perform the UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure to establish another emergency PDU session. The UE may perform the UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure to transfer an existing emergency PDU session or an existing PDN connection for emergency services.

If:

a) the UE requests to perform handover of an existing PDU session between 3GPP access and non-3GPP access;

b) the UE requests to perform transfer an existing PDN connection in the EPS to the 5GS; or

c) the UE requests to perform transfer an existing PDN connection in an untrusted non-3GPP access connected to the EPC to the 5GS;

the UE shall:

a) set the PDU session ID in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message and in the UL NAS TRANSPORT message to the stored PDU session ID corresponding to the PDN connection; and

b) set the S-NSSAI in the UL NAS TRANSPORT message to the stored S-NSSAI associated with the PDU session ID of a non-emergency PDU session. The UE shall not request to perform handover of an existing non-emergency PDU session between 3GPP access and non-3GPP access if the S-NSSAI is not included in the allowed NSSAI for the target access.

If the N5CW device supports 3GPP access and requests to perform handover of an existing PDU session from non-3GPP access to 3GPP access, the N5CW device shall set the PDU session ID in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message and in the UL NAS TRANSPORT message to "PDU session identity value 15".

If the UE is registered to a network which supports ATSSS and the UE requests to establish a new PDU session the UE may allow the network to upgrade the requested PDU session to an MA PDU session. In order to allow the network to upgrade the requested PDU session to an MA PDU session, the UE shall set "MA PDU session network upgrade is allowed" in the MA PDU session information IE and shall set the request type to "initial request" in the UL NAS TRANSPORT message. If the UE is registered to a network which does not support ATSSS, the UE shall not perform the procedure to allow the network to upgrade the requested PDU session to an MA PDU session.

If the UE is registered to a network which supports ATSSS, the UE may request to establish an MA PDU session. If the UE requests to establish an MA PDU session, the UE shall set the request type to "MA PDU request" in the UL NAS TRANSPORT message. If the UE is registered to a network which does not support ATSSS, the UE shall not request to establish an MA PDU session.

When the UE is registered over both 3GPP access and non-3GPP access in the same PLMN and the UE requests to establish a new MA PDU session, the UE may provide an S-NSSAI in the UL NAS TRANSPORT message only if the S-NSSAI is included in the allowed NSSAIs of both accesses.

NOTE7: If the UE requested DNN corresponds to an LADN DNN, the AMF does not forward the MA PDU session information IE to the SMF but sends the message back to the UE to inform of the unhandled request (see subclause5.4.5.2.5).

If the UE is registered to a network which supports ATSSS and the UE has already an MA PDU session established over one access, the UE may perform the UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure to establish user-plane resources over the other access for the MA PDU session as specified in subclause4.22 of 3GPPTS23.502[9] and the S-NSSAI associated with the MA PDU session is included in the allowed NSSAI of the other access. If the UE establishes user-plane resources over the other access for the MA PDU session, the UE shall:

a) set the request type to "MA PDU request" in the UL NAS TRANSPORT message;

b) set the PDU session ID to the stored PDU session ID corresponding to the established MA PDU session in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message and in the UL NAS TRANSPORT message; and

c) set the S-NSSAI in the UL NAS TRANSPORT message to the stored S-NSSAI associated with the PDU session ID.

If the UE requests to establish a new MA PDU session or if the UE requests to establish a new PDU session and the UE allows the network to upgrade the requested PDU session to an MA PDU session:

a) if the UE supports ATSSS Low-Layer functionality with any steering mode as specified in subclause5.32.6 of 3GPPTS23.501[8], the UE shall set the ATSSS-ST bits to "ATSSS Low-Layer functionality with any steering mode supported" in the 5GSM capability IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message;

b) if the UE supports MPTCP functionality with any steering mode and ATSSS-LL functionality with only active-standby steering mode as specified in subclause5.32.6 of 3GPPTS23.501[8], the UE shall set the ATSSS-ST bits to "MPTCP functionality with any steering mode and ATSSS-LL functionality with only active-standby steering mode supported" in the 5GSM capability IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message;

c) if the UE supports MPTCP functionality with any steering mode and ATSSS-LL functionality with any steering mode as specified in subclause5.32.6 of 3GPPTS23.501[8], the UE shall set the ATSSS-ST bits to "MPTCP functionality with any steering mode and ATSSS-LL functionality with any steering mode supported" in the 5GSM capability IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message; and

d) if a performance measurement function in the UE can perform access performance measurements using the QoS flow of the non-default QoS rule as specified in subclause5.32.5 of 3GPPTS23.501[8], the UE shall set the APMQF bit to "Access performance measurements per QoS flow supported" in the 5GSM capability IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message.

If the UE requests to establish a new MA PDU session and the UE supports to establish a PDN connection as the user plane resource of an MA PDU session, the UE shall include the ATSSS request parameter in the Extended protocol configuration options IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message.

If the UE is registered to a network which does not support ATSSS and the UE has already an MA PDU session established over one access, the UE shall not attempt to establish user-plane resources for the MA PDU session over the network which does not support ATSSS as specified in subclause4.22 of 3GPPTS23.502[9].

If the UE supports 3GPP PS data off, except for the transfer of a PDU session from non-3GPP access to 3GPP access and except for the establishment of user plane resources on the other access for the MA PDU session, the UE shall include the Extended protocol configuration options IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message and include the 3GPP PS data off UE status. The UE behaves as described in subclause6.2.10.

If the UE supports Reliable Data Service, the UE shall include the Extended protocol configuration options IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message and include the Reliable Data Service request indicator. The UE behaves as described in subclause6.2.15.

If the UE supports DNS over (D)TLS (see 3GPPTS33.501[24]), the UE shall include the Extended protocol configuration options IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message and include DNS server security information indicator and optionally, if the UE wishes to indicate which security protocol type(s) are supported by the UE, it may include the DNS server security protocol support.

NOTE8: Support of DNS over (D)TLS is based on the informative requirements as specified in 3GPPTS33.501[24].

If:

a) the PDU session type value of the PDU session type IE is set to "IPv4", "IPv6" or "IPv4v6";

b) the UE indicates "Control plane CIoT 5GS optimization supported" and "IP header compression for control plane CIoT 5GS optimization supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message; and

c) the network indicates "Control plane CIoT 5GS optimization supported" and "IP header compression for control plane CIoT 5GS optimization supported" in the 5GS network support feature IE of the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message;

the UE shall include the IP header compression configuration IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message.

If:

a) the PDU session type value of the PDU session type IE is set to "Ethernet";

b) the UE indicates "Control plane CIoT 5GS optimization supported" and "Ethernet header compression for control plane CIoT 5GS optimization supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message; and

c) the network indicates "Control plane CIoT 5GS optimization supported" and "Ethernet header compression for control plane CIoT 5GS optimization supported" in the 5GS network support feature IE of the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message;

the UE shall include the Ethernet header compression configuration IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message.

If the UE supports transfer of port management information containers, the UE shall:

a) set the TPMIC bit to "Transfer of port management information containers supported" in the 5GSM capability IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message;

b) if the UE requests to establish a PDU session of "Ethernet" PDU session type , include the DS-TT Ethernet port MAC address IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message and set its contents to the MAC address of the DS-TT Ethernet port used for the PDU session;

c) if the UE-DS-TT residence time is available at the UE, include the UE-DS-TT residence time IE and set its contents to the UE-DS-TT residence time; and

d) if a Port management information container is provided by the DS-TT, include the Port management information container IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message.

NOTE9: Only SSC mode 1 is supported for a PDU session which is for time synchronization or TSC.

If the UE supporting S1 mode supports receiving QoS rules with the length of two octets or QoS flow descriptions with the length of two octets via the Extended protocol configuration options IE, the UE shall include the QoS rules with the length of two octets support indicator or the QoS flow descriptions with the length of two octets support indicator, respectively, in the Extended protocol configuration options IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message.

If:

- the UE is operating in single-registration mode;

- the UE supports local IP address in traffic flow aggregate description and TFT filter in S1 mode; and

- the PDU session Type requested is different from "Unstructured".

the UE shall indicate the support of local address in TFT in S1 mode in the Extended protocol configuration options IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message.

If the W-AGF acting on behalf of the FN-RG requests to establish a PDU session of "IPv6" or "IPv4v6" PDU session type, the W-AGF acting on behalf of the FN-RG may include in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message the Suggested interface identifier IE with the PDU session type value field set to "IPv6" and containing the interface identifier for the IPv6 link local address associated with the PDU session suggested to be allocated to the FN-RG.

If the UE supports provisioning of ECS configuration information to the EEC in the UE, then the UE shall include the Extended protocol configuration options IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message and shall include the ECS configuration information provisioning support indicator.

If the UE supports receiving DNS server addresses in protocol configuration options, the UE shall include the Extended protocol configuration options IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message and in the Extended protocol configuration options IE:

a) if the UE requests to establish a PDU session of "IPv4" or "IPv4v6" PDU session type, the UE shall include the DNS server IPv4 address request; and

b) if the UE requests to establish a PDU session of "IPv6" or "IPv4v6" PDU session type, the UE shall include the DNS server IPv6 address request.

If the UE supporting UAS services requests to establish a PDU session for C2 communication, the UE shall include the Service-level-AA container IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message. In the Service-level-AA container IE, the UE shall include:

a) the service-level device ID with the value set to the CAA-level UAV ID of the UE; and

b) if available, the service-level-AA payload with the value set to the C2 authorization payload and the service-level-AA payload type with the value set to "C2 authorization payload".

NOTE10:  The C2 authorization payload in the service-level-AA payload can include the pairing information for C2 communication and the flight authorization information.

If the UE supports the EAS rediscovery, the UE shall include the Extended protocol configuration options IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message and shall include the EAS rediscovery support indication in the Extended protocol configuration options IE.

If the UE needs to include a PDU session pair ID based on the matching URSP rule or UE local configuration, the UE shall include the PDU session pair ID IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message. If the UE needs to include an RSN based on the matching URSP rule or UE local configuration, the UE shall include the RSN IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message.

If the UE is not registered for onboarding services in SNPN and needs PVS information, the UE shall include the Extended protocol configuration options IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message and include the PVS information request in the Extended protocol configuration options IE. 

If the UE supports the EDC, the UE shall include the Extended protocol configuration options IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message and shall include the EDC support indicator in the Extended protocol configuration options IE.

If the UE supports a "destination MAC address range type" packet filter component and a "source MAC address range type" packet filter component, the UE shall include the Extended protocol configuration options IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message and shall include the MS support of MAC address range in 5GS indicator in the Extended protocol configuration options IE.

The UE shall transport:

a) the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message;

b) the PDU session ID of the PDU session being established, being handed over, being transferred, or been established as an MA PDU session;

c) if the request type is set to:

1) "initial request" or "MA PDU request" and the UE determined to establish a new PDU session or an MA PDU session based on either a URSP rule including one or more S-NSSAIs in the URSP (see subclause6.2.9) or UE local configuration, according to subclause4.2.2 of 3GPPTS24.526[19]:

i) if the UE is in the HPLMN or the subscribed SNPN, an S-NSSAI in the allowed NSSAI which corresponds to one of the S-NSSAI(s) in the matching URSP rule, if any, or else to the S-NSSAI(s) in the UE local configuration or in the default URSP rule, if any, according to the conditions given in subclause4.2.2 of 3GPPTS24.526[19];

ii) if the UE is in a non-subscribed SNPN, the UE determined according to the conditions given in subclause4.2.2 of 3GPPTS24.526[19] to establish a new PDU session or an MA PDU session based on a URSP rule including one or more S-NSSAIs, and the URSP rule is a part of a non-subscribed SNPN signalled URSP (see 3GPPTS24.526[19]):

A) an S-NSSAI in the allowed NSSAI, which is one of the S-NSSAI(s) in the URSP rule; and

B) a mapped S-NSSAI associated with the S-NSSAI in A); or

Editors note: (WI:eNPN CR:4268) It is FFS whether the UE always has a mapped subscribed SNPN S-NSSAI for a non-subscribed SNPN S-NSSAI.

iii) otherwise:

A) one of the mapped S-NSSAI(s) which corresponds to one of the S-NSSAI(s) in the matching URSP rule, if any, or else to the S-NSSAI(s) in the UE local configuration or in the default URSP rule, if any, according to the conditions given in subclause4.2.2 of 3GPPTS24.526[19]; and

B) the S-NSSAI in the allowed NSSAI associated with the S-NSSAI in A); or

1a) "initial request" and the UE determined to establish a new PDU session based on the PDU session parameters for 5G ProSe layer-3 UE-to-network relay UE including an S-NSSAI in the UE policies for 5G ProSe UE-to-network relay UE as defined in 3GPPTS24.555[19F]:

i) in case of a non-roaming scenario, an S-NSSAI in the allowed NSSAI which corresponds to the S-NSSAI in the selected PDU session parameters for 5G ProSe layer-3 UE-to-network relay UE, if any; or

ii) in case of a roaming scenario:

A) one of the mapped S-NSSAI(s) which corresponds to the S-NSSAI in the selected PDU session parameters for 5G ProSe layer-3 UE-to-network relay UE, if any; and

B) the S-NSSAI in the allowed NSSAI associated with the S-NSSAI in A); or

2) "existing PDU session", an S-NSSAI, which is an S-NSSAI associated with the PDU session and (if available in roaming scenarios) a mapped S-NSSAI, with exception when S-NSSAI is not provided by the network in subclause6.1.4.2;

d) if the request type is set to:

1) "initial request" or "MA PDU request" and the UE determined to establish a new PDU session or an MA PDU session based on either a URSP rule including one or more DNNs in the URSP (see subclause6.2.9) or UE local configuration, according to subclause4.2.2 of 3GPPTS24.526[19], a DNN which corresponds to one of the DNN(s) in the matching URSP rule, if any, or else to the DNN(s) in the UE local configuration or in the default URSP rule, if any, according to the conditions given in subclause4.2.2 of 3GPPTS24.526[19];

1a) "initial request" and the UE determined to establish a new PDU session based on the PDU session parameters for 5G ProSe layer-3 UE-to-network relay UE including a DNN in the UE policies for 5G ProSe UE-to-network relay UE as defined in 3GPPTS24.555[19F], a DNN which corresponds to the DNN in the selected PDU session parameters for 5G ProSe layer-3 UE-to-network relay UE, if any; or

2) "existing PDU session", a DNN which is a DNN associated with the PDU session;

e) the request type which is set to:

1) "initial request", if the UE is not registered for emergency services and the UE requests to establish a new non-emergency PDU session;

2) "existing PDU session", if the UE is not registered for emergency services and the UE requests:

i) handover of an existing non-emergency PDU session between 3GPP access and non-3GPP access;

ii) transfer of an existing PDN connection for non-emergency bearer services in the EPS to the 5GS; or

iii) transfer of an existing PDN connection for non-emergency bearer services in an untrusted non-3GPP access connected to the EPC to the 5GS;

3) "initial emergency request", if the UE requests to establish a new emergency PDU session;

4) "existing emergency PDU session", if the UE requests:

i) handover of an existing emergency PDU session between 3GPP access and non-3GPP access;

ii) transfer of an existing PDN connection for emergency bearer services in the EPS to the 5GS; or

iii) transfer of an existing PDN connection for emergency bearer services in an untrusted non-3GPP access connected to the EPC to the 5GS; or

5) "MA PDU request", if:

i) the UE requests to establish an MA PDU session;

ii) the UE requests to establish user plane resources over other access of an MA PDU session established over one access only; or

iii) the UE performs inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode according to subclause4.8.2.3.1 and requests transfer of a PDN connection which is a user plane resource of an MA PDU session; and

f) the old PDU session ID which is the PDU session ID of the existing PDU session, if the UE initiates the UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure upon receiving the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND messages with the 5GSM cause IE set to #39 "reactivation requested";

using the NAS transport procedure as specified in subclause5.4.5, and the UE shall start timer T3580 (see example in figure6.4.1.2.1).

For bullet c) 1), if the matching URSP rule does not have an associated S-NSSAI, or if the UE does not have any matching URSP rule and there is no S-NSSAI in the UE local configuration or in the default URSP rule, the UE shall not provide any S-NSSAI in a PDU session establishment procedure.

For bullet c) 1a), if the selected PDU session parameters for 5G ProSe layer-3 UE-to-network relay UE do not have an associated S-NSSAI, the UE shall not provide any S-NSSAI in a PDU session establishment procedure.

For bullet d) 1), if the matching URSP rule does not have an associated DNN, or if the UE does not have any matching URSP rule and there is no DNN in the UE local configuration or in the default URSP rule and:

a) if the UE requests a connectivity to the default DNN for the S-NSSAI and the requested connectivity requires PAP/CHAP, the UE should provide a DNN in a PDU session establishment procedure; or

b) otherwise, the UE shall not provide any DNN in a PDU session establishment procedure.

For bullet d) 1a), if the selected the PDU session parameters for 5G ProSe layer-3 UE-to-network relay UE do not have an associated DNN, the UE shall not provide any DNN in a PDU session establishment procedure.

If the request type is set to "initial emergency request" or "existing emergency PDU session" or the UE is registered for onboarding services in SNPN, neither DNN nor S-NSSAI is transported by the UE using the NAS transport procedure as specified in subclause5.4.5.



Figure6.4.1.2.1: UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure

Upon receipt of a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message, a PDU session ID, optionally an S-NSSAI associated with (if available in roaming scenarios) a mapped S-NSSAI, optionally a DNN determined by the AMF, optionally a DNN selected by the network (if different from the DNN determined by the AMF), the request type, and optionally an old PDU session ID, the SMF checks whether connectivity with the requested DN can be established. If the requested DNN is not included, the SMF shall use the default DNN.

If the PDU session being established is a non-emergency PDU session, the request type is not set to "existing PDU session" and the PDU session authentication and authorization by the external DN is required due to local policy, the SMF shall check whether the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message includes the SM PDU DN request container IE or the Service-level-AA container IE.

If the PDU session being established is a non-emergency PDU session, the request type is not set to "existing PDU session", the SM PDU DN request container IE is included in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message, the PDU session authentication and authorization by the external DN is required due to local policy and user's subscription data, and:

a) the information for the PDU session authentication and authorization by the external DN in the SM PDU DN request container IE is compliant with the local policy and user's subscription data, the SMF shall proceed with the EAP Authentication procedure specified in 3GPPTS33.501[24] and refrain from accepting or rejecting the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message until the EAP Authentication procedure finalizes; or

b) the information for the PDU session authentication and authorization by the external DN in the SM PDU DN request container IE is not compliant with the local policy and user's subscription data, the SMF shall consider it as an abnormal case and proceed as specified in subclause6.4.1.7.

If the PDU session being established is a non-emergency PDU session, the request type is not set to "existing PDU session", the SM PDU DN request container IE is not included in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message and the PDU session authentication and authorization by the external DN is required due to local policy and user's subscription data, the SMF shall proceed with the EAP Authentication procedure specified in 3GPPTS33.501[24] and refrain from accepting or rejecting the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message until the EAP Authentication procedure finalizes.

If the SMF receives the old PDU session ID from the AMF and a PDU session exists for the old PDU session ID, the SMF shall consider that the request for the relocation of SSC mode 3 PDU session anchor with multiple PDU sessions as specified in 3GPPTS23.502[9] is accepted by the UE.

If the SMF receives the onboarding indication from the AMF, the SMF shall consider that the PDU session is established for onboarding services in SNPN.

If the UE has set the TPMIC bit to "Transfer of port management information containers supported" in the 5GSM capability IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message and has included a DS-TT Ethernet port MAC address IE (if the PDU session type is "Ethernet"), the Port management information container IE, and, optionally, the UE-DS-TT residence time IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message, the SMF shall operate as specified in 3GPPTS23.502[9] subclause4.3.2.2.1.

If requested by the upper layers, the UE supporting UAS services shall initiate a request to establish a PDU session for UAS services, where the UE:

a) shall include the service-level device ID with the value set to the CAA-level UAV ID;

b) if provided by the upper layers, shall include the service-level-AA server address, with the value set to the USS address; and

c) if provided by the upper layers, shall include:

i) the service-level-AA payload type, with the value set to "UUAA payload"; and

ii) the service-level-AA payload, with the value set to UUAA payload,

in the Service-level-AA container IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message.

If the PDU session being established is a non-emergency PDU session, the request type is not set to "existing PDU session", the Service-level-AA container IE is included in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message, and

a) the service-level authentication and authorization by the external DN is required due to local policy;

b) there is a valid user's subscription information for the requested DNN or for the requested DNN and S-NSSAI; and

c) the information for the service-level authentication and authorization by the external DN in the Service-level-AA container IE includes CAA-level UAV ID,

then the SMF shall proceed with the UUAA-SM procedure as specified in 3GPPTS23.256[6AB] and refrain from accepting or rejecting the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message until the service-level authentication and authorization procedure is completed.

The UE supporting UAS services shall not request a PDU session establishment procedure to the same DNN (or no DNN, if no DNN was indicated by the UE) and the same S-NSSAI (or no S-NSSAI, if no S-NSSAI was indicated by the UE) for which the UE has requested a service level authentication and authorization procedure which is ongoing.

If the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message includes the PDU session pair ID IE, the RSN IE, or both, the SMF shall operate as specified in clause5.33.2 of 3GPPTS23.501[8].

6.4.1.3 UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure accepted by the network

If the connectivity with the requested DN is accepted by the network, the SMF shall create a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message.

If the UE requests establishing an emergency PDU session, the network shall not check for service area restrictions or subscription restrictions when processing the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message.

The SMF shall set the Authorized QoS rules IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message to the authorized QoS rules of the PDU session and may include the authorized QoS flow descriptions IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message set to the authorized QoS flow descriptions of the PDU session.

NOTE1: This is applicable also if the PDU session establishment procedure was initiated to perform handover of an existing PDU session between 3GPP access and non-3GPP access, and even if the authorized QoS rules and authorized QoS flow descriptions for source and target access of the handover are the same.

The SMF shall ensure that the number of the packet filters used in the authorized QoS rules of the PDU Session does not exceed the maximum number of packet filters supported by the UE for the PDU session. If the received request type is "initial emergency request", the SMF shall set the Authorized QoS flow descriptions IE according to the initial QoS parameters used for establishing emergency services configured in the SMF emergency configuration data.

SMF shall set the Authorized QoS flow descriptions IE to the authorized QoS flow descriptions of the PDU session, if:

a) the Authorized QoS rules IE contains at least one GBR QoS flow;

b) the QFI is not the same as the 5QI of the QoS flow identified by the QFI;

c) the QoS flow can be mapped to an EPS bearer as specified in subclause4.11.1 of 3GPPTS23.502[9]; or

d) the QoS flow is established for the PDU session used for relaying, as specified in subclause5.6.2.1 of 3GPPTS23.304[6E].

NOTE2: In cases other than above listed cases, it is up to the SMF implementation to include the authorized QoS flow description for the QoS flow in the Authorized QoS flow descriptions IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message.

If interworking with EPS is supported for the PDU session, the SMF shall set in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message:

a) the Mapped EPS bearer contexts IE to the EPS bearer contexts mapped from one or more QoS flows of the PDU session; and

b) the EPS bearer identity parameter in the Authorized QoS flow descriptions IE to the EPS bearer identity corresponding to the QoS flow, for each QoS flow which can be transferred to EPS.

If the "Create new EPS bearer" operation code in the Mapped EPS bearer contexts IE was received, and there is no corresponding Authorized QoS flow descriptions IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message, the UE shall send a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message including a Mapped EPS bearer contexts IE to delete the mapped EPS bearer context. If the EPS bearer identity parameter in the Authorized QoS flow descriptions IE was received, the operation code is "Create new QoS flow description" and there is no corresponding Mapped EPS bearer contexts IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message, the UE shall not diagnose an error, and shall keep storing the association between the QoS flow and the corresponding EPS bearer identity.

Furthermore, the SMF shall store the association between the QoS flow and the mapped EPS bearer context, for each QoS flow which can be transferred to EPS.

The SMF shall set the selected SSC mode IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message to:

a) the received SSC mode in the SSC mode IE included in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message based on one or more of the PDU session type, the subscription and the SMF configuration;

b) either the default SSC mode for the data network listed in the subscription or the SSC mode associated with the SMF configuration, if the SSC mode IE is not included in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message.

NOTE3: For bullet b), to avoid issues for UEs not supporting all SSC modes, the network operator can, in the subscription data and local configuration, include at least SSC mode 1 in the allowed SSC modes, and set the default SSC mode to "SSC mode 1" as per 3GPP TS 23.501 [8].

If the PDU session is an emergency PDU session, the SMF shall set the Selected SSC mode IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message to "SSC mode 1". If the PDU session is a non-emergency PDU session of "Ethernet" or "Unstructured" PDU session type, the SMF shall set the Selected SSC mode IE to "SSC mode 1" or "SSC mode 2". If the PDU session is a non-emergency PDU session of "IPv4", "IPv6" or "IPv4v6" PDU session type, the SMF shall set the selected SSC mode IE to "SSC mode 1", "SSC mode 2", or "SSC mode 3".

If the PDU session is a non-emergency PDU session and the UE is not registered for onboarding services in SNPN, the SMF shall set the S-NSSAI IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message to:

a) the S-NSSAI of the PDU session; and

b) the mapped S-NSSAI (if available in roaming scenarios).

The SMF shall set the Selected PDU session type IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message to the selected PDU session type, i.e. the PDU session type of the PDU session.

If the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message includes a PDU session type IE set to "IPv4v6", the SMF shall select "IPv4", "IPv6" or "IPv4v6" as the Selected PDU session type. If the subscription, the SMF configuration, or both, are limited to IPv4 only or IPv6 only for the DNN selected by the network, the SMF shall include the 5GSM cause value #50 "PDU session type IPv4 only allowed", or #51 "PDU session type IPv6 only allowed", respectively, in the 5GSM cause IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message.

If the selected PDU session type is "IPv4", the SMF shall include the PDU address IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message and shall set the PDU address IE to an IPv4 address is allocated to the UE in the PDU session.

If the selected PDU session type is "IPv6", the SMF shall include the PDU address IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message and shall set the PDU address IE to an interface identifier for the IPv6 link local address allocated to the UE in the PDU session.

If the selected PDU session type is "IPv4v6", the SMF shall include the PDU address IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message and shall set the PDU address IE to an IPv4 address and an interface identifier for the IPv6 link local address, allocated to the UE in the PDU session.

If the selected PDU session type of a PDU session established by the W-AGF acting on behalf of the FN-RG is "IPv4v6" or "IPv6", the SMF shall also indicate the SMF's IPv6 link local address in the PDU address IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message.

If the PDU session is a non-emergency PDU session and the UE is not registered for onboarding services in SNPN, the SMF shall set the DNN IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message to the DNN determined by the AMF of the PDU session.

The SMF shall set the Session-AMBR IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message to the Session-AMBR of the PDU session.

If the selected PDU session type is "IPv4", "IPv6", "IPv4v6" or "Ethernet" and if the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message includes a 5GSM capability IE with the RQoS bit set to "Reflective QoS supported", the SMF shall consider that reflective QoS is supported for QoS flows belonging to this PDU session and may include the RQ timer IE set to an RQ timer value in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message.

If the selected PDU session type is "IPv4", "IPv6", "IPv4v6" or "Ethernet" and if the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message includes a Maximum number of supported packet filters IE, the SMF shall consider this number as the maximum number of packet filters that can be supported by the UE for this PDU session. Otherwise the SMF considers that the UE supports 16 packet filters for this PDU session.

The SMF shall consider that the maximum data rate per UE for user-plane integrity protection supported by the UE for uplink and the maximum data rate per UE for user-plane integrity protection supported by the UE for downlink are valid for the lifetime of the PDU session.

If the value of the RQ timer is set to "deactivated" or has a value of zero, the UE considers that RQoS is not applied for this PDU session.

NOTE4: If the 5G core network determines that reflective QoS is to be used for a QoS flow, the SMF sends reflective QoS indication (RQI) to UPF to activate reflective QoS. If the QoS flow is established over 3GPP access, the SMF also includes reflective QoS Attribute (RQA) in QoS profile of the QoS flow during QoS flow establishment.

If the selected PDU session type is "IPv6" or "IPv4v6" and if the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message includes a 5GSM capability IE with the MH6-PDU bit set to "Multi-homed IPv6 PDU session supported", the SMF shall consider that this PDU session is supported to use multiple IPv6 prefixes.

If the selected PDU session type is "Ethernet", the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message includes a 5GSM capability IE with the EPT-S1 bit set to "Ethernet PDN type in S1 mode supported" and the network supports Ethernet PDN type in S1 mode, the SMF shall set the EPT-S1 bit of the 5GSM network feature support IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message to "Ethernet PDN type in S1 mode supported".

If the DN authentication of the UE was performed and completed successfully, the SMF shall set the EAP message IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message to an EAP-success message as specified in IETFRFC3748[34], provided by the DN.

Based on local policies or configurations in the SMF and the Always-on PDU session requested IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message (if available), if the SMF determines that either:

a) the requested PDU session needs to be established as an always-on PDU session (e.g. because the PDU session is for time synchronization or TSC, for URLLC, or for both), the SMF shall include the Always-on PDU session indication IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message and shall set the value to "Always-on PDU session required"; or

b) the requested PDU session shall not be established as an always-on PDU session and:

i) if the UE included the Always-on PDU session requested IE, the SMF shall include the Always-on PDU session indication IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message and shall set the value to "Always-on PDU session not allowed"; or

ii) if the UE did not include the Always-on PDU session requested IE, the SMF shall not include the Always-on PDU session indication IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message.

If the PDU session is an MA PDU session, the SMF shall include the ATSSS container IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message. The SMF shall set the content of the ATSSS container IE as specified in 3GPPTS24.193[13B]. If the UE requests to establish user plane resources over the second access of an MA PDU session which has already been established over the first access and the parameters associated with ATSSS previously provided to the UE are not to be updated, the "ATSSS container contents" shall not be included in the ATSSS container IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message.

If the PDU session is a single access PDU session containing the MA PDU session information IE with the value set to "MA PDU session network upgrade is allowed" and:

a) if the SMF decides to establish a single access PDU session, the SMF shall not include the ATSSS container IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message; or

b) if the SMF decides to establish an MA PDU session, the SMF shall include the ATSSS container IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message, which indicates to the UE that the requested single access PDU session was established as an MA PDU Session.

If the network decides that the PDU session is only for control plane CIoT 5GS optimization, the SMF shall include the control plane only indication in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message.

If:

a) the UE provided the IP header compression configuration IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message; and

b) the SMF supports IP header compression for control plane CIoT 5GS optimization;

the SMF shall include the IP header compression configuration IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message.

If:

a) the UE provided the Ethernet header compression configuration IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message; and

b) the SMF supports Ethernet header compression for control plane CIoT 5GS optimization;

the SMF shall include the Ethernet header compression configuration IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message.

If the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST included the Requested MBS container IE with the MBS operation set to "Join MBS session", the SMF:

a) shall include the TMGI for the MBS session IDs that the UE is allowed to join, if any, in the Received MBS container IE, shall set the MBS decision to "MBS join is accepted" for each of those Received MBS information, may include the MBS start time to indicate the time when the MBS session starts and shall include the MBS security container in each of those Received MBS information if security protection is applied for that MBS session, and shall use separate QoS flows dedicated for multicast by including the Authorized QoS flow descriptions IE if no separate QoS flows dedicated for multicast exist or if the SMF wants to establish new QoS flows dedicated for multicast;

NOTE4: The network determines whether security protection applies or not for the MBS session as specified in 3GPPTS33.501.

b) shall include the TMGI for MBS session IDs that the UE is not allowed to join, if any, in the Received MBS container IE, shall set the MBS decision to "MBS join is rejected" for each of those Received MBS information, shall set the Rejection cause for each of those Received MBS information with the reason of rejection, and if the Rejection cause is set to "MBS session has not started or will not start soon", may include an MBS back-off timer value; and

c) may include in the Received MBS container IE the MBS service area for each MBS session and include in it the MBS TAI list, the NR CGI list or both, that identify the service area(s) for the local MBS service

 NOTE6: For an MBS multicast session that has multiple MBS service areas, the MBS service areas are indicated to the UE using MBS service announcement as described in 3GPPTS23.247[53], which is out of scope of this specification.

in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message. If the UE has set the Type of MBS session ID to "Source specific IP multicast address" in the Requested MBS container IE for certain MBS session(s) in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message, the SMF may include the Source IP address information and Destination IP address information in the Received MBS information together with the TMGI for each of those MBS sessions.

NOTE7: Including the Source IP address information and Destination IP address information in the Received MBS information in that case is to allow the UE to perform the mapping between the requested MBS session ID and the provided TMGI.

NOTE8: In SNPN, TMGI is used together with NID to identify an MBS Session.

If the request type is "existing PDU session", the SMF shall not perform network slice admission control for the PDU session, except for the following cases:

a) when EPS counting is not required for the S-NSSAI of the PDU session for network slice admission control and the PDU session is established due to transfer the PDN connection from S1 mode to N1 mode in case of inter-system change; or

b) handover of an existing PDU session between 3GPP access and non-3GPP access is performed.

The SMF shall send the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message.

Upon receipt of a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message and a PDU session ID, using the NAS transport procedure as specified in subclause5.4.5, the UE shall stop timer T3580, shall release the allocated PTI value and shall consider that the PDU session was established.

If the PDU session establishment procedure was initiated to perform handover of an existing PDU session between 3GPP access and non-3GPP access, then upon receipt of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message the UE shall locally delete any authorized QoS rules, authorized QoS flow descriptions, the session-AMBR and the parameters provided in the Protocol configuration options IE when in S1 mode or the Extended protocol configuration options IE stored for the PDU session before processing the new received authorized QoS rules, authorized QoS flow descriptions, the session-AMBR and the parameters provided in the Extended protocol configuration options IE, if any.

NOTE9: For the case of handover from 3GPP access to non-3GPP access, deletion of the QoS flow descriptions implies deletion of the associated EPS bearer identities, if any, and according to subclause6.1.4.1 also deletion of the associated EPS bearer contexts. Regarding the reverse direction, for PDU sessions via non-3GPP access the network does not allocate associated EPS bearer identities (see 3GPPTS23.502[9], subclause4.11.1.4.1).

If the PDU session establishment procedure was initiated to perform handover of an existing PDU session from 3GPP access to non-3GPP access and that existing PDU session is associated with one or more MBS sessions, the UE shall locally leave the associated MBS sessions and the SMF shall consider the UE as removed from the associated MBS sessions.

For an MA PDU session already established on a single access, except for all those MA PDU sessions with a PDN connection established as a user-plane resource, upon receipt of PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message over the other access:

a) the UE shall delete the stored authorized QoS rules and the stored session-AMBR;

b) if the authorized QoS flow descriptions IE is included in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message, the UE shall delete the stored authorized QoS flow descriptions; and

c) if the mapped EPS bearer contexts IE is included in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message, the UE shall delete the stored mapped EPS bearer contexts.

The UE shall store the authorized QoS rules, and the session-AMBR received in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message for the PDU session. The UE shall also store the authorized QoS flow descriptions if it is included in the Authorized QoS flow descriptions IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message for the PDU session.

If the number of the authorized QoS rules, the number of the packet filters, or the number of the authorized QoS flow descriptions associated with the PDU session have reached the maximum number supported by the UE upon receipt of a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message, then the UE may initiate the PDU session release procedure by sending a PDU SESSION RELEASE REQUEST message with 5GSM cause #26 "insufficient resources".

For a PDU session that is being established with the request type set to "initial request", "initial emergency request" or "MA PDU request", or a PDU session that is being transferred from EPS to 5GS and established with the request type set to "existing PDU session" or "existing emergency PDU session" or a PDU session that is being handed over between non-3GPP access and 3GPP access and established with the request type set to "existing PDU session" or "existing emergency PDU session ", the UE shall verify the authorized QoS rules and the authorized QoS flow descriptions provided in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message for different types of errors as follows:

a) Semantic errors in QoS operations:

1) When the rule operation is "Create new QoS rule", and the DQR bit is set to "the QoS rule is the default QoS rule" when there's already a default QoS rule.

2) When the rule operation is "Create new QoS rule", and there is no rule with the DQR bit set to "the QoS rule is the default QoS rule".

3) When the rule operation is "Create new QoS rule" and two or more QoS rules associated with this PDU session would have identical precedence values.

4) When the rule operation is an operation other than "Create new QoS rule".

5) When the rule operation is "Create new QoS rule", the DQR bit is set to "the QoS rule is not the default QoS rule", and the UE is in NB-N1 mode.

6) When the rule operation is "Create new QoS rule" and two or more QoS rules associated with this PDU session would have identical QoS rule identifier values.

7) When the rule operation is "Create new QoS rule", the DQR bit is set to "the QoS rule is not the default QoS rule", and the PDU session type of the PDU session is "Unstructured".

8) When the flow description operation is an operation other than "Create new QoS flow description".

9) When the flow description operation is "Create new QoS flow description", the QFI associated with the QoS flow description is not the same as the QFI of the default QoS rule and the UE is NB-N1 mode.

10) When the flow description operation is "Create new QoS flow description", the QFI associated with the QoS flow description is not the same as the QFI of the default QoS rule, and the PDU session type of the PDU session is "Unstructured".

 In case 4, case 5, or case 7 if the rule operation is for a non-default QoS rule, the UE shall send a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message to delete the QoS rule with 5GSM cause #83 "semantic error in the QoS operation".

 In case 8, case 9, or case 10, the UE shall send a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message to delete the QoS flow description with 5GSM cause #83 "semantic error in the QoS operation".

 Otherwise for all the cases above, the UE shall initiate a PDU session release procedure by sending a PDU SESSION RELEASE REQUEST message with 5GSM cause #83 "semantic error in the QoS operation".

b) Syntactical errors in QoS operations:

1) When the rule operation is "Create new QoS rule", the QoS rule is a QoS rule of a PDU session of IPv4, IPv6, IPv4v6 or Ethernet PDU session type, and the packet filter list in the QoS rule is empty.

2) When the rule operation is "Create new QoS rule", the DQR bit is set to "the QoS rule is the default QoS rule", the PDU session type of the PDU session is "Unstructured", and the packet filter list in the QoS rule is not empty.

3) When there are other types of syntactical errors in the coding of the Authorized QoS rules IE or the Authorized QoS flow descriptions IE, such as: a mismatch between the number of packet filters subfield and the number of packet filters in the packet filter list when the rule operation is "delete existing QoS rule" or "create new QoS rule", or the number of packet filters subfield is larger than the maximum possible number of packet filters in the packet filter list (i.e., there is no QoS rule precedence subfield included in the QoS rule IE), the QoS Rule Identifier is set to "no QoS rule identifier assigned", or the QoS flow identifier is set to "no QoS flow identifier assigned".

4) When, the rule operation is "Create new QoS rule", there is no QoS flow description with a QFI corresponding to the QFI of the resulting QoS rule and the UE determines, by using the QoS rules QFI as the 5QI, that there is a resulting QoS rule for a GBR QoS flow (as described in 3GPPTS23.501[8] table5.7.4-1).

5) When the flow description operation is "Create new QoS flow description", and the UE determines that there is a QoS flow description of a GBR QoS flow (as described in 3GPP TS 23.501 [8] table 5.7.4-1) which lacks at least one of the mandatory parameters (i.e., GFBR uplink, GFBR downlink, MFBR uplink and MFBR downlink). If the QoS flow description does not include a 5QI, the UE determines this by using the QFI as the 5QI.

 In case 1, case 3 or case 4, if the QoS rule is not the default QoS rule, the UE shall send a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message including a requested QoS rule IE to delete the QoS rule with 5GSM cause #84 "syntactical error in the QoS operation". Otherwise, if the QoS rule is the default QoS rule, the UE shall initiate a PDU session release procedure by sending a PDU SESSION RELEASE REQUEST message with 5GSM cause #84 "syntactical error in the QoS operation".

 In case 2, if the QoS rule is the default QoS rule, the UE shall send a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message including a requested QoS rule IE to delete all the packet filters of the default QoS rule. The UE shall include the 5GSM cause #84 "syntactical error in the QoS operation".

 In case 5, if the default QoS rule is associated with the QoS flow description which lacks at least one of the mandatory parameters, the UE shall initiate a PDU session release procedure by sending a PDU SESSION RELEASE REQUEST message with 5GSM cause #84 "syntactical error in the QoS operation". Otherwise, the UE shall send a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message to delete the QoS flow description which lacks at least one of the mandatory parameters and the associated QoS rule(s), if any, with 5GSM cause #84 "syntactical error in the QoS operation".

NOTE10: It is not considered an error if the UE determines that after processing all QoS operations on QoS rules and QoS flow descriptions there is a QoS flow description that is not associated with any QoS rule and the UE is not in NB-N1 mode.

c) Semantic errors in packet filters:

1) When a packet filter consists of conflicting packet filter components which would render the packet filter ineffective, i.e. no IP packet will ever fit this packet filter. How the UE determines a semantic error in a packet filter is outside the scope of the present document.

 If the QoS rule is the default QoS rule, the UE shall initiate a PDU session release procedure by sending a PDU SESSION RELEASE REQUEST message with 5GSM cause #44 "semantic error in packet filter(s)". Otherwise, the UE shall send a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message to delete the QoS rule with 5GSM cause #44 "semantic error in packet filter(s)".

d) Syntactical errors in packet filters:

1) When the rule operation is "Create new QoS rule" and two or more packet filters in the resultant QoS rule would have identical packet filter identifiers.

2) When there are other types of syntactical errors in the coding of packet filters, such as the use of a reserved value for a packet filter component identifier.

 If the QoS rule is the default QoS rule, the UE shall initiate a PDU session release procedure by sending a PDU SESSION RELEASE REQUEST message with 5GSM cause #45 "syntactical errors in packet filter(s)". Otherwise, the UE shall send a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message to delete the QoS rule with 5GSM cause #45 "syntactical errors in packet filter(s)".

If the Always-on PDU session indication IE is included in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message and:

a) the value of the IE is set to "Always-on PDU session required", the UE shall consider the established PDU session as an always-on PDU session; or

b) the value of the IE is set to "Always-on PDU session not allowed", the UE shall not consider the established PDU session as an always-on PDU session.

The UE shall not consider the established PDU session as an always-on PDU session if the UE does not receive the Always-on PDU session indication IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message.

The UE shall store the mapped EPS bearer contexts, if received in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message. Furthermore, the UE shall also store the association between the QoS flow and the mapped EPS bearer context, for each QoS flow which can be transferred to EPS, based on the received EPS bearer identity parameter in Authorized QoS flow descriptions IE and the mapped EPS bearer contexts. The UE shall check each mapped EPS bearer context for different types of errors as follows:

NOTE11: An error detected in a mapped EPS bearer context does not cause the UE to discard the Authorized QoS rules IE and Authorized QoS flow descriptions IE included in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT, if any.

a) Semantic error in the mapped EPS bearer operation:

1) When the operation code is an operation code other than "Create new EPS bearer".

2) When the operation code is "Create new EPS bearer" and there is already an existing mapped EPS bearer context with the same EPS bearer identity associated with any PDU session.

3) When the operation code is "Create new EPS bearer" and the resulting mapped EPS bearer context has invalid mandatory parameters or missing mandatory parameters (e.g., mapped EPS QoS parameters or traffic flow template for a dedicated EPS bearer context).

 In case 2, if the existing mapped EPS bearer context is associated with the PDU session that is being established, the UE shall not diagnose an error, further process the create request and, if it was process successfully, delete the old EPS bearer context.

 Otherwise, the UE shall initiate a PDU session modification procedure by sending a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message to delete the mapped EPS bearer context with 5GSM cause #85 "Invalid mapped EPS bearer identity".

b) if the mapped EPS bearer context includes a traffic flow template, the UE shall check the traffic flow template for different types of TFT IE errors as follows:

1) Semantic errors in TFT operations:

i) When the TFT operation is an operation other than "Create new TFT"

 The UE shall initiate a PDU session modification procedure by sending a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message to delete the mapped EPS bearer context with 5GSM cause #41 "semantic error in the TFT operation".

2) Syntactical errors in TFT operations:

i) When the TFT operation = "Create new TFT" and the packet filter list in the TFT IE is empty.

ii) When there are other types of syntactical errors in the coding of the TFT IE, such as a mismatch between the number of packet filters subfield, and the number of packet filters in the packet filter list when the TFT operation is "delete existing TFT" or "create new TFT", or the number of packet filters subfield is larger than the maximum possible number of packet filters in the packet filter list.

 The UE shall initiate a PDU session modification procedure by sending a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with to delete the mapped EPS bearer context 5GSM cause #42 "syntactical error in the TFT operation".

3) Semantic errors in packet filters:

i) When a packet filter consists of conflicting packet filter components which would render the packet filter ineffective, i.e. no IP packet will ever fit this packet filter. How the UE determines a semantic error in a packet filter is outside the scope of the present document.

ii) When the resulting TFT does not contain any packet filter which applicable for the uplink direction.

 The UE shall initiate a PDU session modification procedure by sending a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message to delete the mapped EPS bearer context with 5GSM cause #44 "semantic errors in packet filter(s)".

4) Syntactical errors in packet filters:

i) When the TFT operation = "Create new TFT" and two or more packet filters in the resultant TFT would have identical packet filter identifiers.

ii) When the TFT operation = "Create new TFT" and two or more packet filters in all TFTs associated with this PDN connection would have identical packet filter precedence values.

iii) When there are other types of syntactical errors in the coding of packet filters, such as the use of a reserved value for a packet filter component identifier.

 In caseii, if the old packet filters do not belong to the default EPS bearer context, the UE shall not diagnose an error and shall delete the old packet filters which have identical filter precedence values.

 In caseii, if one or more old packet filters belong to the default EPS bearer context, the UE shall initiate a PDU session modification procedure by sending a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message to delete the mapped EPS bearer context with 5GSM cause #45 "syntactical errors in packet filter(s)".

 In casesi andiii the UE shall initiate a PDU session modification procedure by sending a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message to delete the mapped EPS bearer context with 5GSM cause #45 "syntactical error in packet filter(s)".

If the UE detects different errors in the mapped EPS bearer contexts, QoS rules or QoS flow descriptions, the UE may send a single PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message to delete the erroneous mapped EPS bearer contexts, QoS rules or QoS flow descriptions. In that case, the UE shall include a single 5GSM cause in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message.

NOTE12: The 5GSM cause to use cannot be different from: #41 "semantic error in the TFT operation", #42 "syntactical error in the TFT operation", #44 "semantic error in packet filter(s)", #45 "syntactical errors in packet filter(s)", #83 "semantic error in the QoS operation", #84 "syntactical error in the QoS operation", and #85 "Invalid mapped EPS bearer identity". The selection of a 5GSM cause is up to the UE implementation.

If there are mapped EPS bearer context(s) associated with a PDU session, but none of them is associated with the default QoS rule, the UE shall locally delete the mapped EPS bearer context(s) and shall locally delete the stored EPS bearer identity (EBI) in all the QoS flow descriptions of the PDU session, if any.

The UE shall only use the Control plane CIoT 5GS optimization for this PDU session if the Control plane only indication is included in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message.

If the UE requests the PDU session type "IPv4v6" and:

a) the UE receives the selected PDU session type set to "IPv4" and does not receive the 5GSM cause value #50 "PDU session type IPv4 only allowed"; or

b) the UE receives the selected PDU session type set to "IPv6" and does not receive the 5GSM cause value #51 "PDU session type IPv6 only allowed";

the UE may subsequently request another PDU session for the other IP version using the UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure to the same DNN (or no DNN, if no DNN was indicated by the UE) and the same S-NSSAI associated with (if available in roaming scenarios) a mapped S-NSSAI (or no S-NSSAI, if no S-NSSAI was indicated by the UE) with a single address PDN type (IPv4 or IPv6) other than the one already activated.

If the UE requests the PDU session type "IPv4v6", receives the selected PDU session type set to "IPv4" and the 5GSM cause value #50 "PDU session type IPv4 only allowed", the UE shall not subsequently request another PDU session using the UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure to the same DNN (or no DNN, if no DNN was indicated by the UE) and the same S-NSSAI associated with (if available in roaming scenarios) a mapped S-NSSAI (or no S-NSSAI, if no S-NSSAI was indicated by the UE) to obtain a PDU session type different from the one allowed by the network until any of the following conditions is fulfilled:

a) the UE is registered to a new PLMN;

b) the UE is switched off; or

c) the USIM is removed or the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated.

If the UE requests the PDU session type "IPv4v6", receives the selected PDU session type set to "IPv6" and the 5GSM cause value #51 "PDU session type IPv6 only allowed", the UE shall not subsequently request another PDU session using the UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure to the same DNN (or no DNN, if no DNN was indicated by the UE) and the same S-NSSAI associated with (if available in roaming scenarios) a mapped S-NSSAI (or no S-NSSAI, if no S-NSSAI was indicated by the UE) to obtain a PDU session type different from the one allowed by the network until any of the following conditions is fulfilled:

a) the UE is registered to a new PLMN;

b) the UE is switched off; or

c) the USIM is removed or the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated.

NOTE13: For the 5GSM cause values #50 "PDU session type IPv4 only allowed", and #51 "PDU session type IPv6 only allowed", re-attempt in S1 mode for the same DNN (or no DNN, if no DNN was indicated by the UE) is only allowed using the PDU session type(s) indicated by the network.

If the selected PDU session type of the PDU session is "Unstructured" or "Ethernet", the UE supports inter-system change from N1 mode to S1 mode, the UE does not support establishment of a PDN connection for the PDN type set to "non-IP" in S1 mode, and the parameters list field of one or more authorized QoS flow descriptions received in the Authorized QoS flow descriptions IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message contains an EPS bearer identity (EBI), then the UE shall locally remove the EPS bearer identity (EBI) from the parameters list field of such one or more authorized QoS flow descriptions. Additionally the UE shall also initiate a PDU session modification procedure by sending a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message to delete the mapped EPS bearer context with 5GSM cause #85 "Invalid mapped EPS bearer identity".

If the selected PDU session type of the PDU session is "Ethernet", the UE supports inter-system change from N1 mode to S1 mode, the UE does not support establishment of a PDN connection for the PDN type set to "non-IP" in S1 mode, the UE, the network or both of them do not support Ethernet PDN type in S1 mode, and the parameters list field of one or more authorized QoS flow descriptions received in the Authorized QoS flow descriptions IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message contains an EPS bearer identity (EBI), then the UE shall locally remove the EPS bearer identity (EBI) from the parameters list field of such one or more authorized QoS flow descriptions. Additionally, the UE shall also initiate a PDU session modification procedure by sending a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message to delete the mapped EPS bearer context with 5GSM cause #85 "Invalid mapped EPS bearer identity".

For a UE which is registered for disaster roaming services and for a PDU session which is not a PDU session for emergency services:

a) if the parameters list field of one or more authorized QoS flow descriptions received in the Authorized QoS flow descriptions IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message contains an EPS bearer identity (EBI), then the UE shall locally remove the EPS bearer identity (EBI) from the parameters list field of such one or more authorized QoS flow descriptions; and

b) the UE shall locally delete the contents of the Mapped EPS bearer contexts IE if it is received in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message.

If the UE receives an IPv4 Link MTU parameter, an Ethernet Frame Payload MTU parameter, an Unstructured Link MTU parameter, or a Non-IP Link MTU parameter in the Extended protocol configuration options IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message, the UE shall pass to the upper layer the received IPv4 link MTU size, the received Ethernet frame payload MTU size, the unstructured link MTU size, or the non-IP link MTU size.

NOTE14: The IPv4 link MTU size corresponds to the maximum length of user data packet that can be sent either via the control plane or via N3 interface for a PDU session of the "IPv4" PDU session type.

NOTE15: The Ethernet frame payload MTU size corresponds to the maximum length of a payload of an Ethernet frame that can be sent either via the control plane or via N3 interface for a PDU session of the "Ethernet" PDU session type.

NOTE16: The unstructured link MTU size correspond to the maximum length of user data packet that can be sent either via the control plane or via N3 interface for a PDU session of the "Unstructured" PDU session type.

NOTE17: A PDU session of "Ethernet" or "Unstructured" PDU session type can be transferred to a PDN connection of "non-IP" PDN type, thus the UE can request the non-IP link MTU parameter in the PDU session establishment procedure. The non-IP link MTU size corresponds to the maximum length of user data that can be sent either in the user data container in the ESM DATA TRANSPORT message or via S1-U interface as specified in 3GPPTS24.301[15].

If the 5G-RG receives an ACS information parameter in the Extended protocol configuration options IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message, the 5G-RG shall pass the ACS URL in the received ACS information parameter to the upper layer.

If the UE has indicated support for CIoT 5GS optimizations and receives a small data rate control parameters container in the Extended protocol configuration options IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message, the UE shall store the small data rate control parameters value and use the stored small data rate control parameters value as the maximum allowed limit of uplink user data for the PDU session in accordance with 3GPPTS23.501[8].

If the UE has indicated support for CIoT 5GS optimizations and receives an additional small data rate control parameters for exception data container in the Extended protocol configuration options IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message, the UE shall store the additional small data rate control parameters for exception data value and use the stored additional small data rate control parameters for exception data value as the maximum allowed limit of uplink exception data for the PDU session in accordance with 3GPPTS23.501[8].

If the UE has indicated support for CIoT 5GS optimizations and receives an initial small data rate control parameters container or an initial additional small data rate control parameters for exception data container in the Extended protocol configuration options IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message, the UE shall use these parameters for the newly established PDU Session. When the validity period of the initial parameters expire, the parameters received in a small data rate control parameters container or an additional small data rate control parameters for exception data container shall be used.

If the UE receives a Serving PLMN rate control IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message, the UE shall store the Serving PLMN rate control IE value and use the stored serving PLMN rate control value as the maximum allowed limit of uplink control plane user data for the corresponding PDU session in accordance with 3GPPTS23.501[8].

If the UE receives an APN rate control parameters container or an additional APN rate control for exception data parameters container in the Extended protocol configuration options IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message, the UE shall store these parameters and use them to limit the rate at which it generates uplink user data messages for the PDN connection corresponding to the PDU session if the PDU session is transferred to EPS upon inter-system change from N1 mode to S1 mode in accordance with 3GPPTS24.301[15]. The received APN rate control parameters and additional APN rate control for exception data parameters shall replace any previously stored APN rate control parameters and additional APN rate control for exception data parameters, respectively, for this PDN connection.

If the UE receives an initial APN rate control parameters container or an initial additional APN rate control for exception data parameters container in the Extended protocol configuration options IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message, the UE shall store these parameters in the APN rate control status and use them to limit the rate at which it generates exception data messages for the PDN connection corresponding to the PDU session if the PDU session is transferred to EPS upon inter-system change from N1 mode to S1 mode in accordance with 3GPPTS24.301[15]. The received APN rate control status shall replace any previously stored APN rate control status for this PDN connection.

NOTE18: In the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message, the SMF provides either APN rate control parameters container, or initial APN rate control parameters container, in the Extended protocol configuration options IE, but not both.

NOTE19: In the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message, the SMF provides either additional APN rate control for exception data parameters container, or initial additional APN rate control for exception data parameters container, in the Extended protocol configuration options IE, but not both.

If the network accepts the use of Reliable Data Service to transfer data for the PDU session, the network shall include the Extended protocol configuration options IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message and include the Reliable Data Service accepted indicator. The UE behaves as described in subclause6.2.15.

If the UE indicates support of DNS over (D)TLS by providing DNS server security information indicator to the network and optionally, if the UE wishes to indicate which security protocol type(s) are supported by the UE, providing the DNS server security protocol support and the network wants to enforce the use of DNS over (D)TLS, the network may include the Extended protocol configuration options IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message and include the DNS server security information with length of two octets. Upon receiving the DNS server security information, the UE shall pass it to the upper layer. The UE shall use this information to send the DNS over (D)TLS (See 3GPPTS33.501[24]).

NOTE20: Support of DNS over (D)TLS is based on the informative requirements as specified in 3GPPTS33.501[24] and it is implemented based on the operator requirement.

If the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message includes the Service-level-AA container IE with the service-level device ID set to the CAA-level UAV ID, and the SMF is provided by the UAS-NF the successful UUAA-SM result and the CAA-level UAV ID, the SMF shall store the successful result together with the authorized CAA-level UAV ID and transmit the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message to the UE, where the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message shall include the Service-level-AA container IE containing:

a) the service-level-AA response, with the SLAR field set to "Service level authentication and authorization was successful";

b)  the service-level device ID with the value set to the CAA-level UAV ID; and

c) if the UUAA payload is received from the UAS-NF:

1) the service-level-AA payload type, with the values set to "UUAA payload"; and

2) the service-level-AA payload, with the value set to the UUAA payload.

NOTE21: UAS security information can be included in the UUAA payload by the USS as specified in 3GPPTS33.256[24B].

If the network accepts the request of the PDU session establishment for C2 communication, the network shall send the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message including the Service-level-AA container IE containing:

a) the service-level-AA response with the value of C2AR field set to the "C2 authorization was successful";

b) if the C2 authorization payload is provided from the UAS-NF, the service-level-AA payload with the value set to the C2 authorization payload and the service-level-AA payload type with the value set to "C2 authorization payload"; and

c) if the CAA-level UAV ID is provided from the UAS-NF, the service-level device ID with the value set to the CAA-level UAV ID.

NOTE22:The C2 authorization payload in the service-level-AA payload can include the C2 session security information.

Upon receipt of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message of the PDU session for C2 communication, if the Service-level-AA container IE is included, the UE shall forward the service-level-AA contents of the Service-level-AA container IE to the upper layers.

The SMF may be configured with one or more PVS IP addresses or PVS names associated with the DNN and S-NSSAI used for onboarding services in SNPN, for configuration of SNPN subscription parameters in PLMN via the user plane, or for configuration of a UE via the user plane with credentials for NSSAA or PDU session authentication and authorization procedure. If the PDU session was established for onboarding services in SNPN, or the PVS information request is included in the Extended protocol configuration options IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message establishing a PDU session providing connectivity for configuration of SNPN subscription parameters in PLMN via the user plane, the network may include the Extended protocol configuration options IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message and include the PVS IP address(es) or the PVS name(s) or both associated with the DNN and S-NSSAI of the established PDU session, if available. If the PVS information request is included in the Extended protocol configuration options IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message establishing the PDU session providing connectivity for configuration of a UE via the user plane with credentials for NSSAA or PDU session authentication and authorization procedure, based on the subscribed DNN(s) and S-NSSAI(s) of the UE and the DNN and S-NSSAI of the established PDU session, the network should include the Extended protocol configuration options IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message and include the PVS IP address(es) or the PVS name(s) or both, which are associated with the established PDU session and per subscribed DNN(s) and S-NSSAI(s) of the UE, if available.

NOTE22: If the PVS information request is included in the Extended protocol configuration options IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message establishing a PDU session providing connectivity for configuration of SNPN subscription parameters in SNPN via the user plane by a UE which is not registered for onboarding services in SNPN, the SMF can include the PVS IP address(es) or the PVS name(s) or both, associated with the DNN and S-NSSAI of the established PDU session, if available, in the Extended protocol configuration options IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message.

If the UE indicates support for ECS configuration information provisioning by providing the ECS configuration information provisioning support indicator in the Extended protocol configuration options IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message, then the SMF may include the Extended protocol configuration options IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message with

- at least one of ECS IPv4 Address(es), ECS IPv6 Address(es), and ECS FQDN(s); 

- at least one associated ECSP identifier; and 

- optionally, spatial validity conditions associated with the ECS address.

The UE upon receiving one or more ECS IPv4 address(es), if any, ECS IPv6 address(es), if any, or ECS FQDN(s), if any, with the associated spatial validity condition, if any, and an ECSP identifier shall pass them to the upper layers.

NOTE24: The IP address(es) and/or FQDN(s) are associated with the ECSP identifier and replace previously provided ECS configuration information associated with the same ECSP identifier, if any.

If the SMF needs to provide DNS server address(es) to the UE and the UE has provided the DNS server IPv4 address request, the DNS server IPv6 address request or both of them, in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message, then the SMF shall include the Extended protocol configuration options IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message with one or more DNS server IPv4 address(es), one or more DNS server IPv6 address(es) or both of them. If the UE supports receiving DNS server addresses in protocol configuration options and receives one or more DNS server IPv4 address(es), one or more DNS server IPv6 address(es) or both of them, in the Extended protocol configuration options IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message, then the UE shall pass the received DNS server IPv4 address(es), if any, and the received DNS server IPv6 address(es), if any, to upper layers.

NOTE25: The received DNS server address(es) replace previously provided DNS server address(es), if any.

If the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message includes the Received MBS container IE, for each of the Received MBS information:

a) if MBS decision is set to "MBS join is accepted", the UE shall consider that it has successfully joined the MBS session. The UE shall store the received TMGI and shall use it for any further operation on that MBS session. The UE shall store the received MBS service area associated with the received TMGI, if any. The UE may provide the MBS start time if it is included in the Received MBS information to upper layers; or

b) if MBS decision is set to "MBS join is rejected", the UE shall consider the requested join as rejected. The UE shall store the received MBS service area associated with the received TMGI, if any. If the received Rejection cause is set to "User is outside of local MBS service area", the UE shall not request to join the same MBS session if the UE is camping on a cell that is outside the received MBS service area. If the received Rejection cause is set to "MBS session has not started or will not start soon" and an MBS back-off timer value is included with value that indicates neither zero nor deactivated, the UE shall start a back-off timer T3530 with the value provided in the MBS back-off timer value for the received TMGI, and shall not attempt to join the MBS session with the same TMGI until the expiry of T3530. If the MBS back-off timer value indicates that this timer is deactivated, the UE shall not attempt to join the MBS session with the same TMGI until the UE is switched off, the USIM is removed, or the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated. If the MBS back-off timer value indicates zero, the UE may attempt to join the MBS session with the same TMGI.

If the PDU session is established for IMS signalling and the UE has requested P-CSCF IPv6 address or P-CSCF IPv4 address, the SMF shall include P-CSCF IP address(es) in the Extended protocol configuration options IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message.

NOTE26: The P-CSCF selection functionality is specified in subclause5.16.3.11 of 3GPPTS23.501[8].

Upon receipt of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message, if the UE included the PDU session pair ID in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message, the UE shall associate the PDU session with the PDU session pair ID. If the UE included the RSN in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message, the UE shall associate the PDU session with the RSN.

If the UE supports EDC and the network allows the use of EDC, the SMF shall include the Extended protocol configuration options IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message with the EDC usage allowed indicator. If the UE supports EDC and receives the EDC usage allowed indicator in the Extended protocol configuration options IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message, the UE shall indicate to upper layers that network allows the use of EDC.

If the UE supports EDC and the network requires the use of EDC, the SMF shall include the Extended protocol configuration options IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message with the EDC usage required indicator. If the UE supports EDC and receives the EDC usage required indicator in the Extended protocol configuration options IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message, the UE shall indicate to upper layers that network requires the use of EDC.

If the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message includes a MS support of MAC address range in 5GS indicator in the Extended protocol configuration options IE, the SMF:

a) shall consider that the UE supports a "destination MAC address range type" packet filter component and a "source MAC address range type" packet filter component; and

b) if the SMF supports a "destination MAC address range type" packet filter component and a "source MAC address range type" packet filter component and enables the UE to request QoS rules with a "destination MAC address range type" packet filter component and a "source MAC address range type" packet filter component, shall include the Extended protocol configuration options IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message and shall include the Network support of MAC address range in 5GS indicator in the Extended protocol configuration options IE.

If the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message includes a Network support of MAC address range in 5GS indicator in the Extended protocol configuration options IE, the UE shall consider that the network supports a "destination MAC address range type" packet filter component and a "source MAC address range type" packet filter component.

NOTE27: Handling of indication that network allows the use of EDC or that network requires the use of EDC is specified in 3GPPTS23.548[182].

6.4.1.4 UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure not accepted by the network

6.4.1.4.1 General

If the connectivity with the requested DN is rejected by the network, the SMF shall create a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REJECT message.

The SMF shall set the 5GSM cause IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REJECT message to indicate the reason for rejecting the PDU session establishment.

The 5GSM cause IE typically indicates one of the following SM cause values:

#8 operator determined barring;

#26 insufficient resources;

#27 missing or unknown DNN;

#28 unknown PDU session type;

#29 user authentication or authorization failed;

#31 request rejected, unspecified;

#32 service option not supported;

#33 requested service option not subscribed;

#35 PTI already in use;

#38 network failure;

#39 reactivation requested;

#46 out of LADN service area;

#50 PDU session type IPv4 only allowed;

#51 PDU session type IPv6 only allowed;

#54 PDU session does not exist;

#57: PDU session type IPv4v6 only allowed;

#58: PDU session type Unstructured only allowed;

#61: PDU session type Ethernet only allowed;

#67 insufficient resources for specific slice and DNN;

#68 not supported SSC mode;

#69 insufficient resources for specific slice;

#70 missing or unknown DNN in a slice;

#82 maximum data rate per UE for user-plane integrity protection is too low;

#86 UAS services not allowed; or

#95  111 protocol errors.

If the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message includes a PDU session type IE set to "IPv6", and the subscription, the SMF configuration, or both, are limited to IPv4 only for the requested DNN, the SMF shall include the 5GSM cause value #50 "PDU session type IPv4 only allowed" in the 5GSM cause IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REJECT message.

If the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message includes a PDU session type IE set to "IPv6", and the subscription, the SMF configuration, or both, support none of "IPv4" and "IPv6" PDU session types for the requested DNN, the SMF shall include the 5GSM cause value #28 "unknown PDU session type" in the 5GSM cause IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REJECT message.

If the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message includes a PDU session type IE set to "IPv4", and the subscription, the SMF configuration, or both, are limited to IPv6 only for the requested DNN, the SMF shall include the 5GSM cause value #51 "PDU session type IPv6 only allowed" in the 5GSM cause IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REJECT message.

If the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message includes a PDU session type IE set to "IPv4", and the subscription, the SMF configuration, or both, support none of "IPv4" and "IPv6" PDU session types for the requested DNN, the SMF shall include the 5GSM cause value #28 "unknown PDU session type" in the 5GSM cause IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REJECT message.

If the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message includes a PDU session type IE set to "IPv4v6", and the subscription, the SMF configuration, or both, support none of "IPv4v6", "IPv4" and "IPv6" PDU session types for the requested DNN, the SMF shall include the 5GSM cause value #28 "unknown PDU session type" in the 5GSM cause IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REJECT message.

If the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message includes a PDU session type IE set to "Unstructured" or "Ethernet", and the subscription, the SMF configuration, or both, do not support the PDU session type for the requested DNN, the SMF shall include the 5GSM cause value #28 "unknown PDU session type" in the 5GSM cause IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REJECT message.

If the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message is to establish an MA PDU session and includes a PDU session type IE set to "Unstructured", and the SMF configuration does not support the PDU session type, the SMF shall include the 5GSM cause value #28 "unknown PDU session type" in the 5GSM cause IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REJECT message.

If the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message contains the SSC mode IE indicating an SSC mode not supported by the subscription, the SMF configuration, or both of them, and the SMF decides to rejects the PDU session establishment, the SMF shall include the 5GSM cause value #68 "not supported SSC mode" in the 5GSM cause IE and the SSC modes allowed by SMF in the Allowed SSC mode IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REJECT message.

If the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message is to establish an MA PDU session and MA PDU session is not allowed due to operator policy and subscription, and the SMF decides to reject the PDU session establishment, the SMF shall include the 5GSM cause value #33 "requested service option not subscribed" in the 5GSM cause IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REJECT message.

If the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message is identified to be for C2 communication and:

a) does not include the Service-level-AA container IE with the service-level device ID set to the CAA-level UAV ID; or

b) does not include the Service-level-AA container IE with the service-level-AA payload set to the C2 authorization payload,

the SMF shall reject the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message by transmitting a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REJECT message with 5GSM cause IE set to 5GSM cause value #86 "UAS services not allowed".

In 3GPP access, if the operator's configuration requires user-plane integrity protection for the PDU session and, the maximum data rate per UE for user-plane integrity protection supported by the UE for uplink or the maximum data rate per UE for user-plane integrity protection supported by the UE for downlink, or both, are lower than required by the operator's configuration, the SMF shall include the 5GSM cause value #82 "maximum data rate per UE for user-plane integrity protection is too low" in the 5GSM cause IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REJECT message.

If the UE requests a PDU session establishment for an LADN when the UE is located outside of the LADN service area, the SMF shall include the 5GSM cause value #46 "out of LADN service area" in the 5GSM cause IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REJECT message.

If the DN authentication of the UE was performed with the PDU session authentication and authorization procedure and completed unsuccessfully, the SMF shall include the 5GSM cause value #29 "user authentication or authorization failed" in the 5GSM cause IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REJECT message and shall set the EAP message IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REJECT message to an EAP-failure message as specified in IETFRFC3748[34], provided by the DN.

If the DN authentication of the UE was performed with the service-level authentication and authorization procedure and completed unsuccessfully, the SMF shall include the 5GSM cause value #29 "user authentication or authorization failed" in the 5GSM cause IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REJECT message and shall include the service-level-AA response provided by DN in the Service-level-AA container IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REJECT message.

Based on the local policy and user's subscription data, if a PDU session is being established with the request type set to "existing PDU session" and the SMF determines the UE has:

a) moved between a tracking area in NB-N1 mode and a tracking area in WB-N1 mode;

b) moved between a tracking area in NB-S1 mode and a tracking area in WB-N1 mode; or

c) moved between a tracking area in WB-S1 mode and a tracking area in NB-N1 mode,

the SMF may reject the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message and:

a) include the 5GSM cause value #39 "reactivation requested" in the 5GSM cause IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REJECT message; or

b) include a 5GSM cause value other than #39 "reactivation requested" in the 5GSM cause IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REJECT message.

NOTE1: The included 5GSM cause value is up to the network implementation.

If the PDU session cannot be established due to resource unavailability in the UPF, the SMF shall include the 5GSM cause value #26 "insufficient resources" in the 5GSM cause IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REJECT message.

Based on the user's subscription data and the operator policy, if the SMF determines that the UUAA-SM procedure needs to be performed for a UE but the SMF does not receives the service-level device ID set to the CAA-level UAV ID in the Service-level-AA container IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message from the UE, the SMF shall include the 5GSM cause value #86 "UAS services not allowed" in the 5GSM cause IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REJECT message.

The network may include a Back-off timer value IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REJECT message.

If the 5GSM cause value is #26 "insufficient resources", #67 "insufficient resources for specific slice and DNN", or #69 "insufficient resources for specific slice" and the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message was received from a UE configured for high priority access in selected PLMN or the request type provided during the PDU session establishment is set to "initial emergency request" or "existing emergency PDU session", the network shall not include a Back-off timer value IE.

If the 5GSM cause value is #29 "user authentication or authorization failed ", the network should include a Back-off timer value IE.

If the Back-off timer value IE is included and the 5GSM cause value is different from #26 "insufficient resources", #28 "unknown PDU session type", #46 "out of LADN service area", "#50 "PDU session type IPv4 only allowed", #51 "PDU session type IPv6 only allowed", #54 "PDU session does not exist", #57 "PDU session type IPv4v6 only allowed", #58 "PDU session type Unstructured only allowed", #61 "PDU session type Ethernet only allowed", #67 "insufficient resources for specific slice and DNN", #68 "not supported SSC mode", and #69 "insufficient resources for specific slice", the network may include the Re-attempt indicator IE to indicate whether the UE is allowed to attempt a PDN connectivity procedure in the PLMN for the same DNN in S1 mode, and whether another attempt in S1 mode or in N1 mode is allowed in an equivalent PLMN.

If the 5GSM cause value is #50 "PDU session type IPv4 only allowed", #51 "PDU session type IPv6 only allowed", #57 "PDU session type IPv4v6 only allowed", #58 "PDU session type Unstructured only allowed", or #61 "PDU session type Ethernet only allowed", the network may include the Re-attempt indicator IE without Back-off timer value IE to indicate whether the UE is allowed to attempt a PDU session establishment procedure in an equivalent PLMN in N1 mode using the same PDU session type for the same DNN (or no DNN, if no DNN was indicated by the UE) and the same S-NSSAI (or no S-NSSAI, if no S-NSSAI was indicated by the UE).

The SMF shall send the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REJECT message.

Upon receipt of a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REJECT message and a PDU session ID, using the NAS transport procedure as specified in subclause5.4.5, the UE shall stop timer T3580 shall release the allocated PTI value and shall consider that the PDU session was not established.

If the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message was sent with request type set to "initial emergency request" or "existing emergency PDU session" and the UE receives a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REJECT message, then the UE may:

a) inform the upper layers of the failure of the procedure; or

NOTE2: This can result in the upper layers requesting another emergency call attempt using domain selection as specified in 3GPPTS23.167[6].

b) de-register locally, if not de-registered already, attempt initial registration for emergency services.

If the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REJECT message includes 5GSM cause #39 "reactivation requested" and the PDU session is being transferred from EPS to 5GS and established with the request type set to "existing PDU session", the UE should re-initiate the UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure as specified in subclause6.4.1 for:

a) the PDU session type associated with the transferred PDU session;

b) the SSC mode associated with the transferred PDU session;

c) the DNN associated with the transferred PDU session; and

d) the S-NSSAI associated with (if available in roaming scenarios) a mapped S-NSSAI if provided in the UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure of the transferred PDU session.

If the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REJECT message includes 5GSM cause #86 "UAS services not allowed" and the UE has not included the service-level device ID in the Service-level-AA container IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message and set the value to the CAA-level UAV ID:

a) the UE shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message for UAS services without including the CAA-level UAV ID in the service-level device ID of the Service-level-AA container IE; and

b) upon receipt of the request from the upper layers to establish a PDU session for UAS services, the UE shall initiate the UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure by including the service-level device ID in the Service-level-AA container IE of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message and set the value to the CAA-level UAV ID as specified in subclause6.4.1.2.

6.4.1.4.2 Handling of network rejection due to congestion control

If:

- the 5GSM cause value #26 "insufficient resources" and the Back-off timer value IE are included in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REJECT message; or

- an indication that the 5GSM message was not forwarded due to DNN based congestion control is received along a Back-off timer value and a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message with the PDU session ID IE set to the PDU session ID of the PDU session;

the UE shall ignore the 5GSM congestion re-attempt indicator or the Re-attempt indicator IE provided by the network, if any, and the UE shall take different actions depending on the timer value received for timer T3396 in the Back-off timer value IE or depending on the Back-off timer value received from the 5GMM sublayer (if the UE is a UE configured for high priority access in selected PLMN, exceptions are specified in subclause6.2.7):

a) If the timer value indicates neither zero nor deactivated and a DNN was provided during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall stop timer T3396 associated with the corresponding DNN, if it is running. If the timer value indicates neither zero nor deactivated and no DNN was provided during the PDU session establishment and the request type was different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", the UE shall stop timer T3396 associated with no DNN if it is running. The UE shall then start timer T3396 with the value provided in the Back-off timer value IE or with the Back-off timer value received from the 5GMM sublayer and:

1) shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message or PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with exception of those identified in subclause6.4.2.1, for the same DNN that was sent by the UE, until timer T3396 expires or timer T3396 is stopped; and

2) shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message without a DNN and with request type different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", or another PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with exception of those identified in subclause6.4.2.1, for a non-emergency PDU session established without a DNN provided by the UE, if no DNN was provided during the PDU session establishment and the request type was different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", until timer T3396 expires or timer T3396 is stopped.

The UE shall not stop timer T3396 upon a PLMN change or inter-system change;

b) if the timer value indicates that this timer is deactivated and a DNN was provided during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall stop timer T3396 associated with the corresponding DNN, if it is running. If the timer value indicates that this timer is deactivated and no DNN was provided during the PDU session establishment and the request type was different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", the UE shall stop timer T3396 associated with no DNN if it is running. The UE:

1) shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message or PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with exception of those identified in subclause6.4.2.1, for the same DNN until the UE is switched off, the USIM is removed, the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated if the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, or the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" is updated if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, or the UE receives a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message for the same DNN from the network, or a PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message for the same DNN from the network, or a PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message without the Back-off timer value IE for the same DNN from the network; and

2) shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message without a DNN and with request type different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", or another PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with exception of those identified in subclause6.4.2.1, for a non-emergency PDU session established without a DNN provided by the UE, if no DNN was provided during the PDU session establishment and the request type was different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", until the UE is switched off, the USIM is removed, the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated if the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, or the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" is updated if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, or the UE receives a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message for a non-emergency PDU session established without a DNN provided by the UE, or a PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message for a non-emergency PDU session established without a DNN provided by the UE, or a PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message without the Back-off timer value IE for a non-emergency PDU session established without a DNN provided by the UE.

 The timer T3396 remains deactivated upon a PLMN change or inter-system change; and

c) if the timer value indicates zero, the UE:

1) shall stop timer T3396 associated with the corresponding DNN, if running, and may send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message or PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message for the same DNN; and

2) if no DNN was provided during the PDU session establishment and the request type was different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", the UE shall stop timer T3396 associated with no DNN, if running, and may send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message without a DNN, or another PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message without a DNN provided by the UE.

If the Back-off timer value IE is not included or no Back-off timer value is received from the 5GMM sublayer, then the UE may send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message or PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message for the same DNN or without a DNN.

When the timer T3396 is running or the timer is deactivated, the UE is allowed to initiate a PDU session establishment procedure for emergency services.

If the timer T3396 is running when the UE enters state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED, the UE remains switched on, and the USIM in the UE (if any) remains the same and the entry in the "list of subscriber data" to which timer T3396 is associated (if any) is not updated, then timer T3396 is kept running until it expires or it is stopped.

If the UE is switched off when the timer T3396 is running, and if the USIM in the UE (if any) remains the same and the entry in the "list of subscriber data" to which timer T3396 is associated (if any) is not updated when the UE is switched on, the UE shall behave as follows:

- let t1 be the time remaining for T3396 timeout at switch off and let t be the time elapsed between switch off and switch on. If t1 is greater than t, then the timer shall be restarted with the value t1  t. If t1 is equal to or less than t, then the timer need not be restarted. If the UE is not capable of determining t, then the UE shall restart the timer with the value t1.

If:

- the 5GSM cause value #67 "insufficient resources for specific slice and DNN" and the Back-off timer value IE are included in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REJECT message; or

- an indication that the 5GSM message was not forwarded due to S-NSSAI and DNN based congestion control is received along a Back-off timer value and a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message with the PDU session ID IE set to the PDU session ID of the PDU session;

the UE shall ignore the Re-attempt indicator IE provided by the network, if any, and take different actions depending on the timer value received for timer T3584 in the Back-off timer value IE or depending on the Back-off timer value received from the 5GMM sublayer (if the UE is a UE configured for high priority access in selected PLMN, exceptions are specified in subclause6.2.8):

a) If the timer value indicates neither zero nor deactivated, the UE shall stop timer T3584 associated with the same [S-NSSAI, DNN] combination as that the UE provided during the PDU session establishment, if it is running. If the timer value indicates neither zero nor deactivated and no DNN was provided during the PDU session establishment and the request type was different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", the UE shall stop timer T3584 associated with [S-NSSAI, no DNN] combination as that the UE provided during the PDU session establishment, if it is running. If the timer value indicates neither zero nor deactivated and no S-NSSAI was provided during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall stop timer T3584 associated with [no S-NSSAI, DNN] combination as that the UE provided during the PDU session establishment, if it is running. If the timer value indicates neither zero nor deactivated and neither S-NSSAI nor DNN was provided during the PDU session establishment and the request type was different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", the UE shall stop timer T3584 associated with [no S-NSSAI, no DNN] combination as that the UE provided during the PDU session establishment, if it is running. The timer T3584 to be stopped includes the timer T3584 applied for all the PLMNs, if running, and the timer T3584 applied for the registered PLMN, if running. The UE shall then start timer T3584 with the value provided in the Back-off timer value IE or with the Back-off timer value received from the 5GMM sublayer and:

1) shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message, or PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with exception of those identified in subclause6.4.2.1, for the same [S-NSSAI, DNN] combination that was sent by the UE, until timer T3584 expires or timer T3584 is stopped;

2) shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message with request type different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", or another PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST with exception of those identified in subclause6.4.2.1, message for the same [S-NSSAI, no DNN] combination that was sent by the UE, if no DNN was provided during the PDU session establishment, until timer T3584 expires or timer T3584 is stopped;

3) shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message, or another PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with exception of those identified in subclause6.4.2.1, for the same [no S-NSSAI, DNN] combination that was sent by the UE, if no S-NSSAI was provided during the PDU session establishment, until timer T3584 expires or timer T3584 is stopped; and

4) shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message with request type different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", or another PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with exception of those identified in subclause6.4.2.1, for the same [no S-NSSAI, no DNN] combination that was sent by the UE, if neither S-NSSAI nor DNN was provided during the PDU session establishment, until timer T3584 expires or timer T3584 is stopped.

 The UE shall not stop timer T3584 upon a PLMN change or inter-system change;

b) if the timer value indicates that this timer is deactivated, the UE:

1) shall stop timer T3584 associated with the same [S-NSSAI, DNN] combination as that the UE provided during the PDU session establishment (including the timer T3584 applied for all the PLMNs, if running, and the timer T3584 applied for the registered PLMN, if running), if it is running. The UE shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message, or PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with exception of those identified in subclause6.4.2.1, for the same [S-NSSAI, DNN] combination that was sent by the UE, until the UE is switched off, the USIM is removed, the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated if the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, or the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" is updated if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, or the UE receives a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message for the same [S-NSSAI, DNN] combination from the network, or a PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message for the same [S-NSSAI, DNN] combination from the network, or a PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message without the Back-off timer value IE for the same [S-NSSAI, DNN] combination from the network;

2) shall stop timer T3584 associated with the same [S-NSSAI, no DNN] combination as that the UE provided during the PDU session establishment (including the timer T3584 applied for all the PLMNs, if running, and the timer T3584 applied for the registered PLMN, if running), if it is running. The UE shall not send a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message with request type different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", or a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with exception of those identified in subclause6.4.2.1, for the same [S-NSSAI, no DNN] combination that was sent by the UE, if no DNN was provided during the PDU session establishment, until the UE is switched off, the USIM is removed, the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated if the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, or the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, or the UE receives an PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message for a non-emergency PDU session established for the same [S-NSSAI, no DNN] combination from the network, or a PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message for a non-emergency PDU session established for the same [S-NSSAI, DNN] combination from the network, or a PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message without the Back-off timer value IE for a non-emergency PDU session established for the same [S-NSSAI, no DNN] combination from the network;

3) shall stop timer T3584 associated with the same [no S-NSSAI, DNN] combination as that the UE provided during the PDU session establishment (including the timer T3584 applied for all the PLMNs, if running, and the timer T3584 applied for the registered PLMN, if running), if it is running. The UE shall not send a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message, or a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with exception of those identified in subclause6.4.2.1, for the same [no S-NSSAI, DNN] combination that was sent by the UE, if no S-NSSAI was provided during the PDU session establishment, until the UE is switched off, the USIM is removed, the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated, or the UE receives a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message for the same [no S-NSSAI, DNN] combination from the network, or a PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message for a non-emergency PDU session established for the same [no S-NSSAI, no DNN] combination from the network, or a PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message without the Back-off timer value IE for the same [no S-NSSAI, DNN] combination from the network; and

4) shall stop timer T3584 associated with the same [no S-NSSAI, no DNN] combination as that the UE provided during the PDU session establishment (including the timer T3584 applied for all the PLMNs, if running, and the timer T3584 applied for the registered PLMN, if running), if it is running. The UE shall not send a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message with request type different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", or a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with exception of those identified in subclause6.4.2.1, for the same [no S-NSSAI, no DNN] combination that was sent by the UE, if neither S-NSSAI nor DNN was provided during the PDU session establishment, until the UE is switched off, the USIM is removed, the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated if the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, or the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" is updated if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, or the UE receives an PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message for a non-emergency PDU session established for the same [no S-NSSAI, no DNN] combination from the network or a PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message without the Back-off timer value IE for a non-emergency PDU session established for the same [no S-NSSAI, no DNN] combination from the network.

 The timer T3584 remains deactivated upon a PLMN change or inter-system change; and

c) if the timer value indicates zero, the UE:

1) shall stop timer T3584 associated with the same [S-NSSAI, DNN] combination as that the UE provided during the PDU session establishment (including the timer T3584 applied for all the PLMNs, if running, and the timer T3584 applied for the registered PLMN, if running), if it is running. The UE may send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message or PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message for the same [S-NSSAI, DNN] combination;

2) shall stop timer T3584 associated with the same [S-NSSAI, no DNN] combination as that the UE provided during the PDU session establishment (including the timer T3584 applied for all the PLMNs, if running, and the timer T3584 applied for the registered PLMN, if running), if it is running. The UE may send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message or PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message for the same [S-NSSAI, no DNN] combination if no DNN was provided during the PDU session establishment and the request type was different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session";

3) shall stop timer T3584 associated with the same [no S-NSSAI, DNN] combination as that the UE provided during the PDU session establishment (including the timer T3584 applied for all the PLMNs, if running, and the timer T3584 applied for the registered PLMN, if running), if it is running. The UE may send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message, or PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message for the same [no S-NSSAI, DNN] combination if no NSSAI was provided during the PDU session establishment; and

4) shall stop timer T3584 associated with the same [no S-NSSAI, no DNN] combination as that the UE provided during the PDU session establishment (including the timer T3584 applied for all the PLMNs, if running, and the timer T3584 applied for the registered PLMN, if running), if it is running. The UE may send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message, or PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message for the same [no S-NSSAI, no DNN] combination if neither S-NSSAI nor DNN was provided during the PDU session establishment and the request type was different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session".

If the 5GSM congestion re-attempt indicator IE with the ABO bit set to "The back-off timer is applied in all PLMNs" is included in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REJECT message with the 5GSM cause value #67 "insufficient resources for specific slice and DNN", then the UE shall apply the timer T3584 for all the PLMNs. Otherwise, the UE shall apply the timer T3584 for the registered PLMN.

If the Back-off timer value IE is not included or no Back-off timer value is received from the 5GMM sublayer, then the UE may send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message or PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message for the same [S-NSSAI, DNN] combination, or for the same [S-NSSAI, no DNN] combination, or for the same [no S-NSSAI, DNN] combination, or for the same [no S-NSSAI, no DNN] combination.

When the timer T3584 is running or the timer is deactivated, the UE is allowed to initiate a PDU session establishment procedure for emergency services.

If the timer T3584 is running when the UE enters state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED, the UE remains switched on, and the USIM in the UE (if any) remains the same and the entry in the "list of subscriber data" to which timer T3584 is associated (if any) is not updated, then timer T3584 is kept running until it expires or it is stopped.

If the UE is switched off when the timer T3584 is running, and if the USIM in the UE (if any) remains the same and the entry in the "list of subscriber data" to which timer T3584 is associated (if any) is not updated when the UE is switched on, the UE shall behave as follows:

- let t1 be the time remaining for T3584 timeout at switch off and let t be the time elapsed between switch off and switch on. If t1 is greater than t, then the timer shall be restarted with the value t1  t. If t1 is equal to or less than t, then the timer need not be restarted. If the UE is not capable of determining t, then the UE shall restart the timer with the value t1.

If:

- the 5GSM cause value #69 "insufficient resources for specific slice" and the Back-off timer value IE are included in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REJECT message; or

- an indication that the 5GSM message was not forwarded due to S-NSSAI only based congestion control is received along a Back-off timer value and a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message with the PDU session ID IE set to the PDU session ID of the PDU session;

the UE shall ignore the Re-attempt indicator IE provided by the network, if any, and take different actions depending on the timer value received for timer T3585 in the Back-off timer value IE or depending on the Back-off timer value received from the 5GMM sublayer (if the UE is a UE configured for high priority access in selected PLMN, exceptions are specified in subclause6.2.8):

a) If the timer value indicates neither zero nor deactivated and an S-NSSAI was provided during the PDU session establishment and the request type was different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", the UE shall stop timer T3585 associated with the corresponding S-NSSAI, if it is running. If the timer value indicates neither zero nor deactivated and no S-NSSAI was provided during the PDU session establishment and the request type was different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", the UE shall stop timer T3585 associated with no S-NSSAI if it is running. The timer T3585 to be stopped includes the timer T3585 applied for all the PLMNs, if running, and the timer T3585 applied for the registered PLMN, if running. The UE shall then start timer T3585 with the value provided in the Back-off timer value IE or with the Back-off timer value received from the 5GMM sublayer and:

1) shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message with request type different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", or another PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with exception of those identified in subclause6.4.2.1, for a non-emergency PDU session for the same S-NSSAI that was sent by the UE, until timer T3585 expires or timer T3585 is stopped; and

2) shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message without an S-NSSAI and with request type different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", or another PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with exception of those identified in subclause6.4.2.1, for a non-emergency PDU session established without an S-NSSAI provided by the UE, if no S-NSSAI was provided during the PDU session establishment and the request type was different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", until timer T3585 expires or timer T3585 is stopped.

 The UE shall not stop timer T3585 upon a PLMN change or inter-system change;

b) if the timer value indicates that this timer is deactivated and an S-NSSAI was provided during the PDU session establishment and the request type was different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", the UE shall stop timer T3585 associated with the corresponding S-NSSAI, if it is running. If the timer value indicates that this timer is deactivated and no S-NSSAI was provided during the PDU session establishment and the request type was different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", the UE shall stop timer T3585 associated with no S-NSSAI if it is running. The timer T3585 to be stopped includes the timer T3585 applied for all the PLMNs, if running, and the timer T3585 applied for the registered PLMN, if running. The UE:

1) shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message with request type different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", or another PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST with exception of those identified in subclause6.4.2.1, for a non-emergency PDU session for the same S-NSSAI until the UE is switched off, the USIM is removed, the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated if the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, or the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" is updated if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, or the UE receives a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message for a non-emergency PDU session for the same S-NSSAI from the network, or a PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message for a non-emergency PDU session for the same S-NSSAI from the network, or a PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message without the Back-off timer value IE for the same S-NSSAI from the network; and

2) shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message without an S-NSSAI and with request type different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", or another PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with exception of those identified in subclause6.4.2.1, for a non-emergency PDU session established without an S-NSSAI provided by the UE, if no S-NSSAI was provided during the PDU session establishment and the request type was different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", until the UE is switched off, the USIM is removed, the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated if the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, or the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" is updated if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, or the UE receives a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message for a non-emergency PDU session established without an S-NSSAI provided by the UE, or a PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message for a non-emergency PDU session established without an S-NSSAI provided by the UE, or a PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message without the Back-off timer value IE for a non-emergency PDU session established without an S-NSSAI provided by the UE.

 The timer T3585 remains deactivated upon a PLMN change or inter-system change; and

c) if the timer value indicates zero, the UE:

1) shall stop timer T3585 associated with the corresponding S-NSSAI (including the timer T3585 applied for all the PLMNs, if running, and the timer T3585 applied for the registered PLMN, if running), if running, and may send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message or PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message for the same S-NSSAI; and

2) if no S-NSSAI was provided during the PDU session establishment and the request type was different from "initial emergency request " and different from "existing emergency PDU session", the UE shall stop timer T3585 associated with no S-NSSAI, if running, and may send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message without an S-NSSAI (including the timer T3585 applied for all the PLMNs, if running, and the timer T3585 applied for the registered PLMN, if running), or another PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message without an S-NSSAI provided by the UE.

If the 5GSM congestion re-attempt indicator IE with the ABO bit set to "The back-off timer is applied in all PLMNs" is included in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REJECT message with the 5GSM cause value #69 "insufficient resources for specific slice", then the UE shall apply the timer T3585 for all the PLMNs. Otherwise, the UE shall apply the timer T3585 for the registered PLMN. Additionally, if the 5GSM congestion re-attempt indicator IE with the CATBO bit set to "The back-off timer is applied in the current access type" is included in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REJECT message with the 5GSM cause value #69 "insufficient resources for specific slice", then the UE shall apply the timer T3585 for the current access type. Otherwise, the UE shall apply the timer T3585 for both 3GPP access type and non-3GPP access type.

If the Back-off timer value IE is not included or no Back-off timer value is received from the 5GMM sublayer, then the UE may send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message or PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message for the same S-NSSAI or without an S-NSSAI.

When the timer T3585 is running or the timer is deactivated, the UE is allowed to initiate a PDU session establishment procedure for emergency services.

If the timer T3585 is running when the UE enters state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED, the UE remains switched on, and the USIM in the UE (if any) remains the same and the entry in the "list of subscriber data" to which timer T3585 is associated (if any) is not updated, then timer T3585 is kept running until it expires or it is stopped.

If the UE is switched off when the timer T3585 is running, and if the USIM in the UE (if any) remains the same and the entry in the "list of subscriber data" to which timer T3585 is associated (if any) is not updated when the UE is switched on, the UE shall behave as follows:

 let t1 be the time remaining for T3585 timeout at switch off and let t be the time elapsed between switch off and switch on. If t1 is greater than t, then the timer shall be restarted with the value t1  t. If t1 is equal to or less than t, then the timer need not be restarted. If the UE is not capable of determining t, then the UE shall restart the timer with the value t1.

NOTE: As described in this subclause, upon PLMN change or inter-system change, the UE does not stop the timer T3584 or T3585. This means the timer T3584 or T3585 can still be running or be deactivated for the given 5GSM procedure, the PLMN, the S-NSSAI and optionally the DNN combination when the UE returns to the PLMN or when it performs inter-system change back from S1 mode to N1 mode. Thus the UE can still be prevented from sending another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST or PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message in the PLMN for the same S-NSSAI and optionally the same DNN.

Upon PLMN change, if T3584 is running or is deactivated for an S-NSSAI, a DNN, and old PLMN, but T3584 is not running and is not deactivated for the S-NSSAI, the DNN, and new PLMN, then the UE is allowed to send a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message for the same S-NSSAI and the same DNN in the new PLMN.

Upon PLMN change, if T3585 is running or is deactivated for an S-NSSAI and old PLMN, but T3585 is not running and is not deactivated for the S-NSSAI and new PLMN, then the UE is allowed to send a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message for the same S-NSSAI in the new PLMN.

6.4.1.4.3 Handling of network rejection not due to congestion control

If the 5GSM cause value is different from #26 "insufficient resources", #28 "unknown PDU session type", #39 "reactivation requested", #46 "out of LADN service area", #50 "PDU session type IPv4 only allowed", #51 "PDU session type IPv6 only allowed", #54 "PDU session does not exist", #57 "PDU session type IPv4v6 only allowed", #58 "PDU session type Unstructured only allowed", #61 "PDU session type Ethernet only allowed", #67 "insufficient resources for specific slice and DNN", #68 "not supported SSC mode", and #69 "insufficient resources for specific slice", #86 "UAS services not allowed", and #33 "requested service option not subscribed" upon sending PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST to establish an MA PDU session, and the Back-off timer value IE is included, the UE shall behave as follows: (if the UE is a UE configured for high priority access in selected PLMN, exceptions are specified in subclause6.2.12):

a) if the timer value indicates neither zero nor deactivated and:

1) if the UE provided a DNN and S-NSSAI to the network during the PDU session establishment and the 5GSM cause value is different from #27 "missing or unknown DNN", the UE shall start the back-off timer with the value provided in the Back-off timer value IE for the PDU session establishment procedure and [PLMN, DNN, (mapped) HPLMN S-NSSAI] combination. The UE shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message for the same DNN and (mapped) HPLMN S-NSSAI in the current PLMN, until the back-off timer expires, the UE is switched off, the USIM is removed, or the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated if the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, or the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" is updated if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder;

2) if the UE provided a DNN to the network during the PDU session establishment and the 5GSM cause value is #27 "missing or unknown DNN", the UE shall start the back-off timer with the value provided in the Back-off timer value IE for the PDU session establishment procedure and [PLMN, DNN] combination. The UE shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message for the same DNN in the current PLMN, until the back-off timer expires, the UE is switched off, the USIM is removed, or the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated if the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, or the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" is updated if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder;

3) if the UE did not provide a DNN or S-NSSAI or any of the two parameters to the network during the PDU session establishment and the 5GSM cause value is different from #27 "missing or unknown DNN", it shall start the back-off timer accordingly for the PDU session establishment procedure and the [PLMN, DNN, no S-NSSAI], [PLMN, no DNN, (mapped) HPLMN S-NSSAI] or [PLMN, no DNN, no S-NSSAI] combination. Dependent on the combination, the UE shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message for the same [PLMN, DNN, no S-NSSAI], [PLMN, no DNN, (mapped) HPLMN S-NSSAI] or [PLMN, no DNN, no S-NSSAI] combination in the current PLMN, until the back-off timer expires, the UE is switched off, the USIM is removed, or the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated if the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, or the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" is updated if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder; or

4) if the UE did not provide a DNN to the network during the PDU session establishment and the 5GSM cause value is #27 "missing or unknown DNN", it shall start the back-off timer accordingly for the PDU session establishment procedure and the [PLMN, no DNN] combination. The UE shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message for the same [PLMN, no DNN] in the current PLMN, until the back-off timer expires, the UE is switched off, the USIM is removed, or the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated if the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, or the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" is updated if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder;

b) if the timer value indicates that this timer is deactivated and:

1) if the UE provided a DNN and S-NSSAI to the network during the PDU session establishment and the 5GSM cause value is different from #27 "missing or unknown DNN", the UE shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message for the same DNN and (mapped) HPLMN S-NSSAI in the current PLMN, until the UE is switched off, the USIM is removed, or the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated if the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, or the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" is updated if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder;

2) if the UE provided a DNN to the network during the PDU session establishment and the 5GSM cause value is #27 "missing or unknown DNN", the UE shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message for the same DNN in the current PLMN, until the UE is switched off, the USIM is removed, or the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated if the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, or the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" is updated if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder;

3) if the UE did not provide a DNN or S-NSSAI or any of the two parameters to the network during the PDU session establishment and the 5GSM cause value is different from #27 "missing or unknown DNN", the UE shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message for the same [PLMN, DNN, no S-NSSAI], [PLMN, no DNN, (mapped) HPLMN S-NSSAI] or [PLMN, no DNN, no S-NSSAI] combination in the current PLMN, until the UE is switched off, the USIM is removed, or the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated if the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, or the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" is updated if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder; or

4) if the UE did not provide a DNN to the network during the PDU session establishment and the 5GSM cause value is #27 "missing or unknown DNN", the UE shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message for the same [PLMN, no DNN] in the current PLMN, until the UE is switched off, the USIM is removed, or the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated if the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, or the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" is updated if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder; and

c) if the timer value indicates zero and the 5GSM cause value is different from #27 "missing or unknown DNN", the UE may send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message for the same combination of [PLMN, DNN, (mapped) HPLMN S-NSSAI], [PLMN, DNN, no S-NSSAI], [PLMN, no DNN, (mapped) HPLMN S-NSSAI], or [PLMN, no DNN, no S-NSSAI] in the current PLMN. If the timer value indicates zero and the 5GSM cause value is #27 "missing or unknown DNN", the UE may send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message for the same combination of [PLMN, DNN], or [PLMN, no DNN] in the current PLMN.

If the Back-off timer value IE is not included, then the UE shall ignore the Re-attempt indicator IE provided by the network in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REJECT message, if any.

a) Additionally, if the 5GSM cause value is #8 "operator determined barring", #32 "service option not supported", #33 "requested service option not subscribed" upon sending PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST not to establish an MA PDU session, or #70 "missing or unknown DNN in a slice", then:

1) the UE not operating in SNPN access operation mode shall proceed as follows:

i) if the UE is registered in the HPLMN or in a PLMN that is within the EHPLMN list, the UE shall behave as described above in the present subclause using the configured SM Retry Timer value as specified in 3GPPTS24.368[17] or in USIM file NASCONFIG as specified in 3GPPTS31.102[22], if available, as back-off timer value; and

NOTE1: The way to choose one of the configured SM Retry Timer values for back-off timer value is up to UE implementation if the UE is configured with:
- an SM Retry Timer value in ME as specified in 3GPPTS24.368[17]; and
- an SM Retry Timer value in USIM file NASCONFIG as specified in 3GPPTS31.102[22].

ii) otherwise, if the UE is not registered in its HPLMN or in a PLMN that is within the EHPLMN list, or if the SM Retry Timer value is not configured, the UE shall behave as described above in the present subclause, using the default value of 12 minutes for the back-off timer; or

2) the UE operating in SNPN access operation mode shall proceed as follows:

i) if:

A) the SM Retry Timer value for the current SNPN as specified in 3GPPTS24.368[17] is available; or

B) the UE used the USIM for registration to the current SNPN and the SM Retry Timer value in USIM file NASCONFIG as specified in 3GPPTS31.102[22] is available;

 then the UE shall behave as described above in the present subclause using the configured SM Retry Timer value as back-off timer value; or

NOTE2: The way to choose one of the configured SM Retry Timer values for back-off timer value is up to UE implementation if both conditions in bullets A) and B) above are satisfied.

ii) otherwise, the UE shall behave as described above in the present subclause, using the default value of 12 minutes for the back-off timer.

b) For 5GSM cause value #27 "missing or unknown DNN", then:

1) the UE not operating in SNPN access operation mode shall proceed as follows:

i) if the UE is registered in the HPLMN or in a PLMN that is within the EHPLMN list, the UE shall start the back-off timer with the configured SM Retry Timer value as specified in 3GPPTS24.368[17] or in USIM file NASCONFIG as specified in 3GPPTS31.102[22], if available, as back-off timer value for the PDU session establishment procedure and the [PLMN, DNN] or [PLMN, no DNN] combination. The UE shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message for the same DNN in the current PLMN, until the back-off timer expires, the UE is switched off or the USIM is removed; and

NOTE3: The way to choose one of the configured SM Retry Timer values for back-off timer value is up to UE implementation if the UE is configured with:
- an SM Retry Timer value in ME as specified in 3GPPTS24.368[17]; and
- an SM Retry Timer value in USIM file NASCONFIG as specified in 3GPPTS31.102[22].

ii) otherwise, if the UE is not registered in its HPLMN or in a PLMN that is within the EHPLMN list, or if the SM Retry Timer value is not configured, the UE shall start the back-off timer with the default value of 12 minutes as back-off timer value for the PDU session establishment procedure and the [PLMN, DNN] or [PLMN, no DNN] combination. The UE shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message for the same DNN in the current PLMN, until the back-off timer expires, the UE is switched off or the USIM is removed; or

2) the UE operating in SNPN access operation mode shall proceed as follows:

i) if:

A) the SM Retry Timer value for the current SNPN as specified in 3GPPTS24.368[17] is available; or

B) the UE used the USIM for registration to the current SNPN and the SM Retry Timer value in USIM file NASCONFIG as specified in 3GPPTS31.102[22] is available;

 then:

- if the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the UE shall start the back-off timer with the configured SM Retry Timer value as back-off timer value for the PDU session establishment procedure and the [SNPN, DNN] or [SNPN, no DNN] combination. The UE shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message for the same DNN in the current SNPN, until the back-off timer expires, the UE is switched off, or the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated; and

- if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the UE shall start the back-off timer with the configured SM Retry Timer value as back-off timer value for the PDU session establishment procedure and the [SNPN, selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or selected PLMN subscription, DNN] or [SNPN, selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or selected PLMN subscription, no DNN] combination. The UE shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message for the same DNN in the current SNPN using the selected entry in the "list of subscriber data" or selected PLMN subscription, until the back-off timer expires, the UE is switched off, the UICC containing the USIM is removed or the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" is updated; or

NOTE4: The way to choose one of the configured SM Retry Timer values for back-off timer value is up to UE implementation if both conditions in bullets A) and B) above are satisfied.

ii) otherwise:

- if the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder,  the UE shall start the back-off timer with the default value of 12 minutes as back-off timer value for the PDU session establishment procedure and the [SNPN, DNN] or [SNPN, no DNN] combination. The UE shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message for the same DNN in the current SNPN, until the back-off timer expires, the UE is switched off, or the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated; and

- if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, the UE shall start the back-off timer with the default value of 12 min as back-off timer value for the PDU session establishment procedure and the [SNPN, selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or selected PLMN subscription, DNN] or [SNPN, selected entry in the "list of subscriber data" or selected PLMN subscription, no DNN] combination. The UE shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message for the same DNN in the current SNPN using the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data", until the back-off timer expires, the UE is switched off, the UICC containing the USIM is removed or the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" is updated; and

c) For 5GSM cause values different from #8 "operator determined barring",  #27 "missing or unknown DNN", #32 "service option not supported", #33 "requested service option not subscribed" and #70 "missing or unknown DNN in a slice", the UE behaviour regarding the start of a back-off timer is unspecified.

The UE shall not stop any back-off timer:

a) upon a PLMN change;

b) upon an inter-system change; or

c) upon registration over another access type.

If the network indicates that a back-off timer for the PDU session establishment procedure is deactivated, then it remains deactivated;

a) upon a PLMN change;

b) upon an inter-system change; or

c) upon registration over another access type.

NOTE5: This means the back-off timer can still be running or be deactivated for the given 5GSM procedure when the UE returns to the PLMN or when it performs inter-system change back from S1 mode to N1 mode. Thus, the UE can still be prevented from sending another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message for the combination of [PLMN, DNN, (mapped) HPLMN S-NSSAI], [PLMN, DNN, no S-NSSAI], [PLMN, no DNN, (mapped) HPLMN S-NSSAI], [PLMN, no DNN, no S-NSSAI] , [PLMN, DNN], or [PLMN, no DNN] in the PLMN.

If the back-off timer is started upon receipt of a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REJECT (i.e. the timer value was provided by the network, a configured value is available or the default value is used as explained above) or the back-off timer is deactivated, the UE behaves as follows:

a) after a PLMN change:

1) the UE may send a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message for the combination of [new PLMN, DNN, (mapped) HPLMN S-NSSAI], [new PLMN, DNN, no S-NSSAI], [new PLMN, no DNN, (mapped) HPLMN S-NSSAI], or [new PLMN, no DNN, no S-NSSAI] in the new PLMN, if the back-off timer is not running and is not deactivated for the PDU session establishment procedure and the combination of [new PLMN, DNN, (mapped) HPLMN S-NSSAI], [new PLMN, DNN, no S-NSSAI], [new PLMN, no DNN, (mapped) HPLMN S-NSSAI], or [new PLMN, no DNN, no S-NSSAI];

2) as an implementation option, for the 5GSM cause value #8 "operator determined barring", #32 "service option not supported", #33 "requested service option not subscribed" and #70 "missing or unknown DNN in a slice", if the network does not include a Re-attempt indicator IE, the UE may decide not to automatically send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message for the same combination of [PLMN, DNN, (mapped) HPLMN S-NSSAI], [PLMN, DNN, no S-NSSAI], [PLMN, no DNN, (mapped) HPLMN S-NSSAI], or [PLMN, no DNN, no S-NSSAI] using the same PDU session type if the UE is registered to a new PLMN which is in the list of equivalent PLMNs; and

3) as an implementation option, for the 5GSM cause value #27 "missing or unknown DNN", if the network does not include a Re-attempt indicator IE, the UE may decide not to automatically send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message for the same combination of [PLMN, DNN] or [PLMN, no DNN] using the same PDU session type if the UE is registered to a new PLMN which is in the list of equivalent PLMNs;

b) if the network does not include the Re-attempt indicator IE to indicate whether re-attempt in S1 mode is allowed, or the UE ignores the Re-attempt indicator IE, e.g. because the Back-off timer value IE is not included, then:

1) if the UE is registered in its HPLMN or in a PLMN that is within the EHPLMN list and the back-off timer is running for the combination of [PLMN, DNN, (mapped) HPLMN S-NSSAI] or [PLMN, DNN, no S-NSSAI], the UE shall apply the configured SM_RetryAtRATChange value as specified in 3GPPTS24.368[17] or in USIM file NASCONFIG as specified in 3GPPTS31.102[22], if available, to determine whether the UE may attempt a PDN connectivity procedure for the same [PLMN, DNN] combination in S1 mode. If the back-off timer is running for the combination of [PLMN, no DNN, (mapped) HPLMN S-NSSAI] or [PLMN, no DNN, no S-NSSAI], the same applies for the PDN connectivity procedure for the [PLMN, no DNN] combination in S1 mode accordingly; and

NOTE6: The way to choose one of the configured SM_RetryAtRATChange values for back-off timer value is up to UE implementation if the UE is configured with:
- an SM_RetryAtRATChange value in ME as specified in 3GPPTS24.368[17]; and
- an SM_RetryAtRATChange value in USIM file NASCONFIG as specified in 3GPPTS31.102[22].

2) if the UE is not registered in its HPLMN or in a PLMN that is within the EHPLMN list, or if the NAS configuration MO as specified in 3GPPTS24.368[17] is not available and the value for inter-system change is not configured in the USIM file NASCONFIG, then the UE behaviour regarding a PDN connectivity procedure for the same [PLMN, DNN] or [PLMN, no DNN] combination in S1 mode is unspecified; and

c) if the network includes the Re-attempt indicator IE indicating that re-attempt in an equivalent PLMN is not allowed, then depending on the timer value received in the Back-off timer value IE, for each combination of a PLMN from the equivalent PLMN list and the respective [DNN, (mapped) HPLMN S-NSSAI], [DNN, no S-NSSAI], [no DNN, (mapped) HPLMN S-NSSAI], or [no DNN, no S-NSSAI] combination, the UE shall start a back-off timer for the PDU session establishment procedure with the value provided by the network, or deactivate the respective back-off timer as follows:

1) if the Re-attempt indicator IE additionally indicates that re-attempt in S1 mode is allowed, the UE shall start or deactivate the back-off timer for N1 mode only; and

2) otherwise, the UE shall start or deactivate the back-off timer for S1 and N1 mode.

If the back-off timer for a [PLMN, DNN] or [PLMN, no DNN] combination, was started or deactivated in S1 mode upon receipt of PDN CONNECTIVITY REJECT message (see 3GPPTS24.301[15]) and the network indicated that re-attempt in N1 mode is allowed, then this back-off timer does not prevent the UE from sending a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message in this PLMN for the same DNN, or without DNN, after inter-system change to N1 mode. If the network indicated that re-attempt in N1 mode is not allowed, the UE shall not send any PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message in this PLMN for the same DNN in combination with any S-NSSAI or without S-NSSAI, or in this PLMN without DNN in combination with any S-NSSAI or without S-NSSAI, after inter-system change to N1 mode until the timer expires, the UE is switched off or the USIM is removed.

NOTE7: The back-off timer is used to describe a logical model of the required UE behaviour. This model does not imply any specific implementation, e.g. as a timer or timestamp.

NOTE8: Reference to back-off timer in this section can either refer to use of timer T3396 or to use of a different packet system specific timer within the UE. Whether the UE uses T3396 as a back-off timer or it uses different packet system specific timers as back-off timers is left up to UE implementation.

When the back-off timer is running or the timer is deactivated, the UE is allowed to initiate a PDU session establishment procedure if the procedure is for emergency services.

If the 5GSM cause value is #28 "unknown PDU session type" and the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message contained a PDU session type IE indicating a PDU session type, the UE shall ignore the Back-off timer value IE and Re-attempt indicator IE provided by the network, if any. The UE may send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message to establish a new PDU session with the PDU session type IE indicating another PDU session type, e.g. using another value which can be used for the rejected component in the same route selection descriptor as specified in 3GPPTS24.526[19]. The behaviour of the UE for 5GSM cause value #28 also applies if the PDU session is a MA PDU Session.

If the 5GSM cause value is #39 "reactivation requested", the UE shall ignore the Back-off timer value IE and Re-attempt indicator IE provided by the network, if any.

NOTE9: Further UE behaviour upon receipt of 5GSM cause value #39 is up to the UE implementation.

If the 5GSM cause value is #46 "out of LADN service area", the UE shall ignore the Back-off timer value IE and Re-attempt indicator IE provided by the network, if any. If the UE is not located inside the LADN service area, the UE shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message or another PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message for the LADN DNN provided by the UE during the PDU session establishment procedure until the LADN information for the specific LADN DNN is updated as described in subclause5.4.4 and subclause5.5.1. If the UE is not located inside the LADN service area, the UE shall not indicate the PDU session(s) for the LADN DNN provided by the UE during the PDU session establishment procedure in the Uplink data status IE included in the SERVICE REQUEST message until the LADN information for the specific LADN DNN is updated as described in subclause5.4.4 and subclause5.5.1.

NOTE10: Based on UE implementation, the UE locating inside the LADN service area can send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message or PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message for the LADN DNN which was rejected with the 5GSM cause value #46 "out of LADN service area".

If the 5GSM cause value is #50 "PDU session type IPv4 only allowed", #51 "PDU session type IPv6 only allowed", #57 "PDU session type IPv4v6 only allowed", #58 "PDU session type Unstructured only allowed", or #61 "PDU session type Ethernet only allowed", the UE shall ignore the Back-off timer value IE provided by the network, if any. The UE shall evaluate the URSP rules if available as specified in 3GPPTS24.526[19]. The UE shall not subsequently send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message for the same DNN (or no DNN, if no DNN was indicated by the UE) and the same (mapped) HPLMN S-NSSAI (or no S-NSSAI, if no S-NSSAI was indicated by the UE) to obtain a PDU session type different from the one allowed by the network until any of the following conditions is fulfilled:

a) the UE is registered to a new PLMN which was not in the list of equivalent PLMNs at the time when the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REJECT message was received;

b) the UE is registered to a new PLMN which was in the list of equivalent PLMNs at the time when the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REJECT message was received, and either the network did not include a Re-attempt indicator IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REJECT message or the Re-attempt indicator IE included in the message indicated that re-attempt in an equivalent PLMN is allowed;

c) void;

d) the UE is switched off; or

e) the USIM is removed, the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated if the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, or the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" is updated if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder.

For the 5GSM cause values #50 "PDU session type IPv4 only allowed", #51 "PDU session type IPv6 only allowed", #57 "PDU session type IPv4v6 only allowed", #58 "PDU session type Unstructured only allowed", and #61 "PDU session type Ethernet only allowed", the UE shall ignore the value of the RATC bit in the Re-attempt indicator IE provided by the network, if any.

NOTE11: For the 5GSM cause values #50 "PDU session type IPv4 only allowed", #51 "PDU session type IPv6 only allowed", #57 "PDU session type IPv4v6 only allowed", #58 "PDU session type Unstructured only allowed", and #61 "PDU session type Ethernet only allowed", re-attempt in S1 mode for the same DNN (or no DNN, if no DNN was indicated by the UE) is only allowed using the PDU session type(s) indicated by the network.

If the 5GSM cause value is #54 "PDU session does not exist", the UE shall ignore the Back-off timer value IE and Re-attempt indicator IE provided by the network, if any. If the PDU session establishment procedure is to perform handover of an existing PDU session between 3GPP access and non-3GPP access, the UE shall release locally the existing PDU session with the PDU session ID included in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REJECT message. The UE may initiate another UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure with the request type set to "initial request" in the subsequent PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message to establish a PDU session with the same DNN (or no DNN, if no DNN was indicated by the UE) and the same (mapped) HPLMN S-NSSAI (or no S-NSSAI, if no S-NSSAI was indicated by the UE).

NOTE12: User interaction is necessary in some cases when the UE cannot re-establish the PDU session(s) automatically.

If the 5GSM cause value is #68 "not supported SSC mode", the UE shall ignore the Back-off timer value IE and Re-attempt indicator IE provided by the network, if any. The UE shall evaluate the URSP rules if available as specified in 3GPPTS24.526[19]. The UE shall not subsequently send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message for the same DNN (or no DNN, if no DNN was indicated by the UE) and the same (mapped) HPLMN S-NSSAI (or no S-NSSAI, if no S-NSSAI was indicated by the UE) using the same SSC mode or an SSC mode which was not included in the Allowed SSC mode IE until any of the following conditions is fulfilled:

a) the UE is registered to a new PLMN which was not in the list of equivalent PLMNs at the time when the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REJECT message was received;

b) the SSC mode which is used to access to the DNN (or no DNN, if no DNN was indicated by the UE) and the (mapped) HPLMN S-NSSAI (or no S-NSSAI, if no S-NSSAI was indicated by the UE) is changed by the UE which subsequently requests a new SSC mode in the Allowed SSC mode IE or no SSC mode;

c) the UE is switched off; or

d) the USIM is removed, the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated if the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, or the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" is updated if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder.

If the UE receives the 5GSM cause value is #33 "requested service option not subscribed" upon sending PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST to establish an MA PDU session, the UE shall ignore the Back-off timer value IE and Re-attempt indicator IE provided by the network, if any. The UE shall evaluate URSP rules, if available, as specified in 3GPPTS24.526[19] and the UE may send PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST after evaluating those URSP rules.

If the 5GSM cause value is #86 "UAS services not allowed", the UE shall ignore the Back-off timer value IE and Re-attempt indicator IE provided by the network, if any, and shall behave as specified in subcluase6.4.1.4.1.

Upon receipt of an indication from 5GMM sublayer that the 5GSM message was not forwarded because the DNN is not supported or not subscribed in a slice along with a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message with the PDU session ID IE set to the PDU session ID of the PDU session, the UE shall stop timer T3580, shall abort the procedure and shall behave as follows:

a) if the timer value indicates neither zero nor deactivated, the UE shall start the back-off timer with the value received from the 5GMM sublayer for the PDU session establishment procedure and the [PLMN, DNN, S-NSSAI] combination or the [PLMN, DNN, no S-NSSAI] combination, if no S-NSSAI was provided during the PDU session establishment. The UE shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message in the PLMN for the same DNN and the same S-NSSAI that were sent by the UE, or for the same DNN and no S-NSSAI if S-NSSAI that was not sent by the UE, until:

1) the back-off timer expires;

2) the UE is switched off;

3) the USIM is removed the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated if the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, or the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" is updated if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder; or

4) the DNN is included in the LADN information and the network provides the LADN information during the registration procedure or the generic UE configuration update procedure;

b) if the timer value is not received from the 5GMM sublayer or the timer value indicates that this timer is deactivated, the UE shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message in the PLMN for the same DNN and the same S-NSSAI that were sent by the UE, or for the same DNN and no S-NSSAI if S-NSSAI that was not sent by the UE, until:

1) the UE is switched off;

2) the USIM is removed, the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated if the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder, or the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" is updated if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder; or

3) the DNN is included in the LADN information and the network provides the LADN information during the registration procedure or the generic UE configuration update procedure; and

c) if the timer value indicates zero, the UE may send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message for the same combination of [PLMN, DNN, S-NSSAI], [PLMN, DNN, no S-NSSAI] in the current PLMN.

6.4.1.5 Handling the maximum number of established PDU sessions

The maximum number of PDU sessions which a UE can establish in a PLMN or SNPN is limited by whichever is the lowest of: the maximum number of PDU session IDs allowed by the protocol (as specified in 3GPPTS24.007[11] subclause11.2.3.1b), the PLMN's or SNPN's maximum number of PDU sessions and the UE's implementation-specific maximum number of PDU sessions.

If during a UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure the 5GSM sublayer in the UE receives an indication that the 5GSM message was not forwarded because:

a) the PLMN's maximum number of PDU sessions has been reached, then the UE determines the PLMN's maximum number of PDU sessions as the number of active PDU sessions it has; or

b) the SNPN's maximum number of PDU sessions has been reached, then the UE determines the SNPN's maximum number of PDU sessions as the number of active PDU sessions it has and associates the determined maximum number of PDU sessions with:

1) the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN if the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder; or

2) the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" or the selected PLMN subscription if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder.

NOTE1: In some situations, when attempting to establish multiple PDU sessions, the number of active PDU sessions that the UE has when 5GMM cause #65 is received is not equal to the maximum number of PDU sessions reached in the network.

NOTE2: When the network supports emergency services, it is not expected that 5GMM cause #65 is returned by the network when the UE requests an emergency PDU session.

NOTE3: There is only one maximum number of PDU sessions for a PLMN regardless of which access the PDU session exists in.

NOTE4: An MA PDU session which (only) has a PDN connection established as a user-plane resource is counted as an active PDU session when determining the PLMN's maximum number of PDU sessions.

The PLMN's maximum number of PDU sessions applies to the PLMN in which the 5GMM cause #65 "maximum number of PDU sessions reached" is received. When the UE is switched off or when the USIM is removed, the UE shall clear all previous determinations representing PLMN's maximum number of PDU sessions.

The SNPN's maximum number of PDU sessions applies to the SNPN in which the 5GMM cause #65 "maximum number of PDU sessions reached" is received. When the UE is switched off, the UE shall clear all previous determinations representing SNPN's maximum number of PDU sessions. In addition:

a) if the UE does not support access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder and the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated, then the UE shall clear all previous determinations representing SNPN's maximum number of PDU sessions associated with the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN; and

b) if the UE supports access to an SNPN using credentials from a credentials holder and:

1) the selected entry of the "list of subscriber data" is updated, then UE shall clear all previous determinations representing SNPN's maximum number of PDU sessions associated with the selected entry in the "list of subscriber data"; or

2) the USIM associated with the selected PLMN subscription is removed, then UE shall clear all previous determinations representing SNPN's maximum number of PDU sessions associated with the selected PLMN subscription.

Upon successful registration with a new PLMN or SNPN, the UE may clear previous determinations representing any PLMN's or SNPN's maximum number(s) of PDU sessions.

If the maximum number of established PDU sessions is reached at the UE and the upper layers of the UE request connectivity to a DNN the UE shall not send a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message unless an established PDU session is released. If the UE needs to release an established PDU session, choosing which PDU session to release is implementation specific, however the UE shall not release the emergency PDU session.

If the UE needs to release a PDU session in order to request an emergency PDU session, it shall either perform a local release of a PDU session or release a PDU session via explicit signalling. If the UE performs a local release, the UE shall:

a) if the PDU session is an MA PDU session:

1) perform a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update to indicate PDU session status to the network over each access that user plane resources have been established; and 

2) perform a normal and periodic tracking area updating to indicate EPS bearer context status to the network as specified in clause5.5.3.2.2 of 3GPPTS24.301[15] when a PDN connection has been established as a user plance resource; or

b) if the PDU session is a single access PDU session, perform a registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update to indicate PDU session status to the network over the access the PDU session is associated with.

6.4.1.5A Handling the maximum number of allowed active user-plane resources for PDU sessions of UEs in NB-N1 mode

For a UE in NB-N1 mode, the UE's maximum number of supported user-plane resources is two (as defined in 3GPPTS36.300[25B]) when the UE sets the Multiple user-plane resources support bit to "Multiple user-plane resources supported" during the registration procedure for initial registration or for mobility and periodic registration update, and one otherwise.

For a UE operating in NB-N1 mode, if:

a) the UE's maximum number of supported user-plane resources is one, then only one PDU session can have active user-plane resources even though that UE might have established more than one PDU session; or

b) the UE's maximum number of supported user-plane resources is two, then only two PDU sessions can have active user-plane resources even though that UE might have established more than two PDU sessions.

When the maximum number of active user-plane resources is reached and upper layers request for more user-plane resources for PDU sessions other than the PDU sessions with those active user-plane resources, the UE can choose to release one or more of the PDU sessions with active user-plane resources to cater for the upper layer request. The choice of which PDU sessions to be released is implementation specific. However if there is a PDU session with an active user-plane that is used for exception data reporting (see subclause6.2.13), that PDU session shall not be released.

If the maximum number of active user-plane resources is reached and the upper layers of the UE request user-plane resources for exception data reporting (see subclause6.2.13), the UE shall release a PDU session that has user-plane resources to cater for the request for exception data reporting. The choice of which PDU session to be released is implementation specific.

If the UE decides to release one or more active user-plane resources to cater for upper layer request, the UE shall release the PDU session via explicit 5GSM signalling.

6.4.1.6 Abnormal cases in the UE

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a) Expiry of timer T3580

 The UE shall, on the first expiry of the timer T3580:

- if the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message was sent with request type set to "initial emergency request" or "existing emergency PDU session", then the UE may:

a) inform the upper layers of the failure of the procedure; or

NOTE1: This can result in the upper layers requesting another emergency call attempt using domain selection as specified in 3GPPTS23.167[6].

b) de-register locally, if not de-registered already, attempt initial registration for emergency services.

 If the UE sent the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message in order to perform a handover of an existing emergency PDU session between 3GPP access and non-3GPP access, the UE shall consider that the emergency PDU session is associated with the source access type.

- otherwise, retransmit the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message and the PDU session information which was transported together with the initial transmission of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message and shall reset and start timer T3580, if still needed. This retransmission can be repeated up to four times, i.e. on the fifth expiry of timer T3580, the UE shall abort the procedure, release the allocated PTI and enter the state PROCEDURE TRANSACTION INACTIVE. If the UE sent the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message in order to perform a handover of an existing non-emergency PDU session between 3GPP access and non-3GPP access, the UE shall consider that the PDU session is associated with the source access type.

b) Upon receiving an indication that the 5GSM message was not forwarded due to routing failure along with a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message with the PDU session ID IE set to the same value as the PDU session ID that was sent by the UE, the UE shall stop timer T3580 and shall abort the procedure. If the UE sent the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message in order to perform a handover of an existing PDU session between 3GPP access and non-3GPP access, the UE shall consider that the PDU session is associated with the source access type.

b1) Upon receiving an indication that the 5GSM message was not forwarded due to service area restrictions along with a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message with the PDU session ID IE set to the same value as the PDU session ID that was sent by the UE, the UE shall stop timer T3580 and shall abort the procedure. If the UE sent the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message in order to perform a handover of an existing PDU session between 3GPP access and non-3GPP access, the UE shall consider that the PDU session is associated with the source access type.

b2) Upon receiving an indication that the 5GSM message was not forwarded because the UE is registered to a PLMN via a satellite NG-RAN cell that is not allowed to operate at the present UE location along with a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message with the PDU session ID IE set to the same value as the PDU session ID that was sent by the UE, the UE shall stop timer T3580 and shall abort the procedure. The UE shall not trigger the PDU session establishment procedure until the UE is deregistered from the PLMN.

b3) Upon receiving an indication that the 5GSM message was not forwarded because the UE is marked in the UE's 5GMM context that it is not allowed to request UAS services along with a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message with the PDU session ID IE set to the same value as the PDU session ID that was sent by the UE, the UE shall stop timer T3580 and shall abort the procedure. The UE shall not trigger the PDU session establishment procedure until the UE is deregistered from the PLMN.

b4) Upon receiving an indication that the 5GSM message was not forwarded because the PLMN's maximum number of PDU sessions has been reached along with a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message with the PDU session ID IE set to the same value as the PDU session ID that was sent by the UE, the UE shall stop timer T3580 and shall abort the procedure.

c) Collision of UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure and network-requested PDU session release procedure.

 If the UE receives a PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message after sending a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message to the network, and the PDU session ID in the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message is the same as the PDU session ID in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message:

i) if the UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure was to request the establishment of user plane resources on the second access for an MA PDU session established on a first access and the Access type IE is not included in PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND or the Access type IE included in PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND indicates the first access, the UE shall proceed with the network-requested PDU session release procedure, abort the UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure, stop timer T3580, release the allocated PTI and enter the state PROCEDURE TRANSACTION INACTIVE;

ii) if the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message was sent with request type set to "existing PDU session" or "existing emergency PDU session" in order to perform a handover of an existing PDU session between 3GPP access and non-3GPP access, the UE shall abort the PDU session establishment procedure and proceed with the network-requested PDU session release procedure; or

iii) otherwise, the UE shall ignore the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message and proceed with the UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure.

d) Inter-system change from N1 mode to S1 mode triggered during UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure.

 If the UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure is triggered for handover of an existing PDU session from non-3GPP access to 3GPP access, and the inter-system change from N1 mode to S1 mode is triggered by the NG-RAN and the UE did not receive response to PDU session establishment request, then the UE shall abort the procedure, stop timer T3580, and notify the upper layer of the handover failure.

NOTE2: This can result in the upper layer requesting re-initiation of handover from non-3GPP access to 3GPP access after the inter-system change is completed, if still required.

e) For an MA PDU session established on a single access, upon receipt of a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message over the other access, if any value of the selected PDU session type, selected SSC mode, 5GSM cause, PDU address, S-NSSAI, DNN IEs in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message is different from the corresponding stored value, the UE shall perform a local release of the MA PDU session, and perform the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update with a REGISTRATION REQUEST message including the PDU session status IE over both accesses.

f) For an MA PDU session has a PDN connection as a user-plane resource, upon receipt of a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message over non-3GPP access, if any value of the selected PDU session type, selected SSC mode, 5GSM cause, PDU address, S-NSSAI, DNN IEs in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message is different from the corresponding stored mapped value, the UE shall perform a local release of the MA PDU session, perform the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update with a REGISTRATION REQUEST message including the PDU session status IE over non-3GPP access, and perform the tracking area updating procedure as specified in clause5.5.3.2.2 of 3GPPTS24.301[15] with a TRACKING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message including EPS bearer context status IE.

g) Collision of UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure initiated to perform handover of an existing PDU session from non-3GPP access to 3GPP access and a notification from the network with access type indicating non-3GPP access.

 If the UE receives a notification from the network with access type indicating non-3GPP access after sending a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message to perform handover of an existing PDU session from non-3GPP access to 3GPP access, the UE shall abort the PDU session establishment procedure, stop timer T3580, proceed with the service request procedure to perform handover of existing PDU session(s) from non-3GPP access to 3GPP access.

h) Collision of UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure and N1 NAS signalling connection release

 The UE may immediately retransmit the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message and stop, reset and restart timer T3580, if the following conditions apply:

1) The original UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure was initiated over an existing N1 NAS signalling connection;

2) the previous transmission of the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message was not initiated due to timer T3580 expiry; and

3) no 5GSM message related to the PDU session (e.g. PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message) was received after the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message was transmitted.

i) Collision of UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure and network-requested PDU session modification procedure

 If the UE receives a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message after sending a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message to the network, and the PDU session ID in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message is the same as the PDU session ID in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message:

i) if the UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure was to request the establishment of user plane resources on the second access for an MA PDU session established on a first access, the UE shall proceed with both the UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure and the network-requested PDU session modification procedure; or

ii) if the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message was sent with request type set to "existing PDU session" or "existing emergency PDU session" in order to perform a handover of an existing PDU session between 3GPP access and non-3GPP access, the UE shall proceed with the UE-requested PDU session establishment procedure and abort the network-requested PDU session modification procedure.

6.4.1.7 Abnormal cases on the network side

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a) If the received request type is "initial emergency request" and there is already another emergency PDU session for the UE, the SMF shall reject the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message with 5GSM cause #31 "request rejected, unspecified" or release locally the existing emergency PDU session and proceed the new PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message

b) The information for the PDU session authentication and authorization by the external DN in PDU DN request container is not compliant with local policy and user's subscription data

 If the PDU session being established is a non-emergency PDU session, the request type is not set to "existing PDU session", the PDU session authentication and authorization by the external DN is required due to local policy and user's subscription data and the information for the PDU session authentication and authorization by the external DN in the SM PDU DN request container IE is not compliant with the local policy and user's subscription data, the SMF shall reject the PDU session establishment request including the 5GSM cause #29 "user authentication or authorization failed", in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REJECT message.

c) UE-requested PDU session establishment with request type set to "initial request" or "initial emergency request" for an existing PDU session:

 If the SMF receives a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message with a PDU session ID identical to the PDU session ID of an existing PDU session and with request type set to "initial request" or "initial emergency request", the SMF shall release locally the existing PDU session and proceed with the PDU session establishment procedure.

d) UE-requested PDU session establishment with request type "existing PDU session" or "existing emergency PDU session" for a PDU session that does not exist:

 If the SMF receives a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message with request type set to "existing PDU session" or "existing emergency PDU session", and the SMF does not have any information about that PDU session, then the SMF shall reject the PDU session establishment procedure with the 5GSM cause set to #54 "PDU session does not exist" in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REJECT message.

e) 5G access network cannot forward the message:

 If the SMF determines based on content of the n2SmInfo attribute specified in 3GPPTS29.502[20A] that the DL NAS TRANSPORT message carrying the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT was not forwarded to the UE by the 5G access network, then the SMF shall reject the PDU session establishment procedure with the 5GSM cause set to #26 "insufficient resources" in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REJECT message.

6.4.2 UE-requested PDU session modification procedure

6.4.2.1 General

The purpose of the UE-requested PDU session modification procedure is:

a) to enable the UE to request modification of a PDU session;

b) to indicate a change of 3GPP PS data off UE status for a PDU session;

c) to revoke the previously indicated support for reflective QoS;

d) to request specific QoS handling and segregation of service data flows;

e) to indicate to the network the relevant 5GSM parameters and capabilities (e.g. the UE's 5GSM capabilities, whether the UE supports more than 16 packet filters, the maximum data rate per UE for user-plane integrity protection supported by the UE for uplink, the maximum data rate per UE for user-plane integrity protection supported by the UE for downlink and whether the UE requests the PDU session to be an always-on PDU session in the 5GS) for a PDN connection established when in S1 mode, after an inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode, if the UE is a UE operating in single-registration mode in a network supporting N26 interface and the UE has not previously successfully performed the UE-requested PDU session modification to indicate to the network the relevant 5GSM parameters and capabilities;

f) to delete one or more mapped EPS bearer contexts;

g) to convey a port management information container;

h) to re-negotiate header compression configuration associated to a PDU session using control plane CIoT 5GS optimization; or

i) to enable the UE to request to join or leave one or more MBS multicast sessions associated with a PDU session.

NOTE1: The case c), d), e), f) and g) do not apply to PDU sessions associated with the control plane only indication.

NOTE2: For case e), the procedure is attempted after the first inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode.

When the UE-requested PDU session modification procedure is used to indicate a change of 3GPP PS data off UE status for a PDU session (see subclause6.2.10), the UE shall initiate the UE-requested PDU session modification procedure even if the UE is outside the LADN service area or the timer T3396, T3584, T3585 or the back-off timer is running or is deactivated.

If the UE needs to revoke the previously indicated support for reflective QoS for a PDU session and timer T3396, T3584, T3585 or the back-off timer is running or is deactivated, the UE shall not initiate the UE-requested PDU session modification procedure and shall instead initiate the UE-requested PDU session release procedure.

If the UE needs to initiate the UE-requested PDU session modification procedure to indicate to the network the relevant 5GSM parameters and capabilities (e.g. the UE's 5GSM capabilities, whether the UE supports more than 16 packet filters, the maximum data rate per UE for user-plane integrity protection supported by the UE for uplink, the maximum data rate per UE for user-plane integrity protection supported by the UE for downlink and whether the UE requests the PDU session to be an always-on PDU session in the 5GS) for a PDN connection established when in S1 mode, after an inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode, the UE is a UE operating in single-registration mode in the network supporting N26 interface, the UE has not previously successfully performed the UE-requested PDU session modification to indicate to the network the relevant 5GSM parameters and capabilities, and:

a) timer T3396, T3584, T3585 or the back-off timer is running, the UE shall initiate the UE-requested PDU session modification procedure after expiry of timer T3396, T3584 or T3585 or after expiry of the back-off timer; or

b) the UE is in substate 5GMM-REGISTERED.NON-ALLOWED-SERVICE and has not performed the the UE-requested PDU session modification procedure (see subclause5.3.5), the UE shall initiate the UE-requested PDU session modification procedure after entering substate 5GMM-REGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE.

6.4.2.2 UE-requested PDU session modification procedure initiation

In order to initiate the UE-requested PDU session modification procedure, the UE shall create a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message.

The UE shall allocate a PTI value currently not used and shall set the PTI IE of the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message to the allocated PTI value.

The UE shall not perform the UE-requested PDU session modification procedure for an emergency PDU session, except for a procedure initiated according to subclause6.4.2.1, item e) only, and for the error cases described in subclause6.4.1.3 and subclause6.3.2.3.

The UE shall not perform the UE-requested PDU session modification procedure for a PDU session for LADN when the UE is located outside the LADN service area except for indicating a change of 3GPP PS data off UE status.

If the UE requests a specific QoS handling and the PDU session is not associated with the control plane only indication, the UE shall include the Requested QoS rules IE indicating requested QoS rules or the Requested QoS flow descriptions IE indicating requested QoS flow descriptions or both for the specific QoS handling. The Requested QoS rules IE includes the packet filters which describe the service data flows requested by the UE. The specific QoS parameters requested by the UE are specified in the Requested QoS flow descriptions IE. If the UE requests the network to bind specific service data flows to a dedicated QoS flow, the UE shall create a new QoS rule by setting the rule operation code to "Create new QoS rule" and shall set the segregation bit to "Segregation requested" for the corresponding QoS rule in the Requested QoS rules IE. The UE shall set the QRI values to "no QoS rule identifier assigned" in the Requested QoS rules IE, if the QoS rules are newly created; otherwise, the UE shall set the QRI values to those of the existing QoS rules for which the specific QoS handling applies. The UE shall set the QFI values to "no QoS flow identifier assigned" in the Requested QoS flow descriptions IE, if the QoS flow descriptions are newly created; otherwise, the UE shall set the QFI values to the QFIs of the existing QoS flow descriptions for which the specific QoS handling applies. The UE shall not request to create more than one QoS flow in a UE-requested PDU session modification procedure. If the SMF receives a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with a Requested QoS rules IE containing more than one QoS rule with the rule operation code set to "Create new QoS rule", the SMF shall assign the same QFI to all the QoS rules which are created.

If the UE requests to join or leave one or more MBS multicast sessions associated with a PDU session, the UE shall include the Requested MBS container IE in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message and shall set the MBS operation to "Join MBS session" for the join case or to "Leave MBS session" for the leave case. The UE shall include the MBS session information(s) and shall set the Type of MBS session ID for each of the MBS session information to either "Temporary Mobile Group Identity (TMGI)" or "Source specific IP multicast address" depending on the type of the MBS session ID available in the UE. Then the remaining values of each of the MBS session informations shall be set as following:

a) if the Type of MBS session ID is set to "Temporary Mobile Group Identity (TMGI)", the UE shall set the MBS session ID to the TMGI; or

b) if the Type of MBS session ID is set to "Source specific IP multicast address for IPv4" or " Source specific IP multicast address for IPv6", the UE shall set the Source IP address information and the Destination IP address information to the corresponding values.

NOTE1: The UE obtains the details of the MBS session ID(s) i.e. TMGI, Source IP address information and Destination IP address information as a pre-configuration in the UE or during the MBS service announcement which is out of scope of this specification.

For a PDN connection established when in S1 mode, after an inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode, if the UE is a UE operating in single-registration mode in a network supporting N26 interface, the PDU session is of "IPv4", "IPv6", "IPv4v6", or "Ethernet" PDU session type, the PDU session is not associated with the control plane only indication:

a) the UE is performing the PDU session modification procedure to indicate the support of reflective QoS and the UE has not previously successfully performed the UE-requested PDU session modification to provide this indication, the UE shall set the RQoS bit to "Reflective QoS supported" in the 5GSM capability IE of the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message; or

b) the UE is performing the PDU session modification procedure to indicate that reflective QoS is not supported and the UE has not previously successfully performed the UE-requested PDU session modification to provide this indication, the UE shall set the RQoS bit to "Reflective QoS not supported" in the 5GSM capability IE of the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message.

If the UE is performing the PDU session modification procedure to revoke the previously indicated support of reflective QoS and the PDU session is not associated with the control plane only indication, the UE shall set the RQoS bit to "Reflective QoS not supported" in the 5GSM capability IE of the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message. The UE shall not indicate support for reflective QoS for this PDU Session for the remaining lifetime of the PDU Session.

NOTE2: The determination to revoke the usage of reflective QoS by the UE for a PDU session is implementation dependent.

For a PDN connection established when in S1 mode, after an inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode, if the UE is a UE operating in single-registration mode in a network supporting N26 interface, the PDU session is of "IPv6" or "IPv4v6" PDU session type, the PDU session is not associated with the control plane only indication:

a) the UE is performing the PDU session modification procedure to indicate the support of Multi-homed IPv6 PDU session and the UE has not previously successfully performed the UE-requested PDU session modification to provide this indication, the UE shall set the MH6-PDU bit to "Multi-homed IPv6 PDU session supported" in the 5GSM capability IE of the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message; or

b) the UE is performing the PDU session modification procedure to indicate that Multi-homed IPv6 PDU session is not supported and the UE has not previously successfully performed the UE-requested PDU session modification to provide this indication, the UE shall set the MH6-PDU bit to "Multi-homed IPv6 PDU session not supported" in the 5GSM capability IE of the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message.

For a PDN connection established when in S1 mode, after an inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode, if the UE is a UE operating in single-registration mode in a network supporting N26 interface, the PDU session is of "IPv4", "IPv6", "IPv4v6", or "Ethernet" PDU session type, the PDU session is not associated with the control plane only indication, the UE supports more than 16 packet filters for this PDU session, and the UE has not previously successfully performed the UE-requested PDU session modification to provide this indication, the UE shall indicate the maximum number of packet filters supported for the PDU session in the Maximum number of supported packet filters IE of the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message.

For a PDN connection established when in S1 mode, after an inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode, if the UE is a UE operating in single-registration mode in a network supporting N26 interface, the PDU session is not associated with the control plane only indication, and the UE has not previously successfully performed the UE-requested PDU session modification to include the Integrity protection maximum data rate IE in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message, the UE shall include the Integrity protection maximum data rate IE in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message.

If the UE is performing the PDU session modification procedure

a) to request the deletion of a non-default QoS rule due to errors in QoS operations or packet filters;

b) to request the deletion of a QoS flow description due to errors in QoS operations; or

c) to request the deletion of a mapped EPS bearer context due to errors in mapped EPS bearer operation, TFT operation or packet filters,

the UE shall include the 5GSM cause IE in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message as described in subclauses6.3.2.3, 6.3.2.4 and 6.4.1.3.

When the UE-requested PDU session modification procedure is used to indicate a change of 3GPP PS data off UE status for a PDU session, the UE shall include the Extended protocol configuration options IE in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message and setting the 3GPP PS data off UE status.

For a PDN connection established when in S1 mode, after an inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode, if the UE is a UE operating in single-registration mode in a network supporting N26 interface, the PDU session is not associated with the control plane only indication, the UE requests the PDU session to be an always-on PDU session in the 5GS and the UE has not previously successfully performed the UE-requested PDU session modification to request this, the UE shall include the Always-on PDU session requested IE and set the value of the IE to "Always-on PDU session requested" in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message.

If a port management information container needs to be delivered (see 3GPPTS23.501[8] and 3GPPTS23.502[9]), the UE shall include a Port management information container IE in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message.

To request re-negotiation of IP header compression configuration, the UE shall include the IP header compression configuration IE in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message if the network indicated "Control plane CIoT 5GS optimization supported" and "IP header compression for control plane CIoT 5GS optimization supported" in the 5GS network support feature support IE.

To request re-negotiation of Ethernet header compression configuration, the UE shall include the Ethernet header compression configuration IE in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message if the network indicated "Control plane CIoT 5GS optimization supported" and "Ethernet header compression for control plane CIoT 5GS optimization supported" in the 5GS network support feature support IE.

After an inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode, if:

a) the UE is operating in single-registration mode in the network supporting N26 interface;

b) the PDU session type value of the PDU session type IE is set to "IPv4", "IPv6" or "IPv4v6";

c) the UE indicates "Control plane CIoT 5GS optimization supported" and "IP header compression for control plane CIoT 5GS optimization supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message; and

d) the network indicates "Control plane CIoT 5GS optimization supported" and "IP header compression for control plane CIoT 5GS optimization supported" in the 5GS network support feature IE of the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message;

the UE shall initiate the PDU session modification procedure to negotiate the IP header compression configuration and include the IP header compression configuration IE in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message.

The UE shall include the Service-level-AA container IE in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message, when requesting to modify an established PDU session for C2 communication. In the Service-level-AA container IE, the UE shall include:

a) the service-level device ID with the value set to the CAA-level UAV ID of the UE; and

b) if available, the service-level-AA payload with the value set to the C2 authorization payload and the service-level-AA payload type with the value set to "C2 authorization payload".

NOTE3: The C2 authorization payload in the service-level-AA payload can include the pairing information for C2 communication and the flight authorization information.

After an inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode, if:

a) the UE is operating in single-registration mode in a network that supports N26 interface;

b) the PDU session type value of the PDU session type IE is set to "Ethernet";

c) the UE indicates "Control plane CIoT 5GS optimization supported" and "Ethernet header compression for control plane CIoT 5GS optimization supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message; and

d) the network indicates "Control plane CIoT 5GS optimization supported" and "Ethernet header compression for control plane CIoT 5GS optimization supported" in the 5GS network support feature IE of the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message;

the UE shall initiate the PDU session modification procedure to negotiate the Ethernet header compression configuration and include the Ethernet header compression configuration IE in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message.

For a PDN connection established when in S1 mode, after an inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode, and if the UE is a UE operating in single-registration mode in a network supporting N26 interface, and the UE supports provisioning of ECS configuration information to the EEC in the UE and the UE has not previously successfully performed the UE-requested PDU session modification to include the ECS configuration information provisioning support indicator, the UE shall include the Extended protocol configuration options IE in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message and shall include the ECS configuration information provisioning support indicator.

For a PDN connection established when in S1 mode, after an inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode, and if the UE is a UE operating in single-registration mode in a network supporting N26 interface, and the UE supports receiving DNS server addresses in protocol configuration options and the UE has not previously successfully performed the UE-requested PDU session modification to indicate this support, the UE shall include the Extended protocol configuration options IE in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message and:

a) if the PDU session is of "IPv4" or "IPv4v6" PDU session type, the UE shall include the DNS server IPv4 address request; and

b) if the PDU session is of "IPv6" or "IPv4v6" PDU session type, the UE shall include the DNS server IPv6 address request.

For a PDN connection established when in S1 mode, after an inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode, and if the UE is a UE operating in single-registration mode in a network supporting N26 interface, and the UE supports the EAS rediscovery and the UE has not previously successfully performed the UE-requested PDU session modification to indicate this support, the UE shall include the Extended protocol configuration options IE in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message and shall include the EAS rediscovery support indication in the Extended protocol configuration options IE.

For a PDN connection established when in S1 mode, after an inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode, and if the UE is a UE operating in single-registration mode in a network supporting N26 interface, and the UE supports the EDC, then the UE shall include the Extended protocol configuration options IE in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message and shall include the EDC support indicator in the Extended protocol configuration options IE.

The UE shall transport:

a) the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message;

b) the PDU session ID; and

c) if the UE-requested PDU session modification:

1) is not initiated to indicate a change of 3GPP PS data off UE status associated to a PDU session, then the request type set to "modification request"; and

2) is initiated to indicate a change of 3GPP PS data off UE status associated to a PDU session, then without transporting the request type;

using the NAS transport procedure as specified in subclause5.4.5, and the UE shall start timer T3581 (see example in figure6.4.2.2.1).

For a PDN connection established when in S1 mode and not associated with the control plane only indication, after inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode, if the UE is registered in a network supporting the ATSSS,

a) the UE may request to modify a PDU session to an MA PDU session; or

b) the UE may allow the network to upgrade the PDU session to an MA PDU session. In order for the UE to allow the network to upgrade the PDU session to an MA PDU session, the UE shall set "MA PDU session network upgrade is allowed" in the MA PDU session information IE and set the request type to "modification request" in the UL NAS TRANSPORT message.

NOTE4: If the DNN corresponds to an LADN DNN, the AMF does not forward the MA PDU session information IE to the SMF but sends the message back to the UE to inform of the unhandled request (see subclause5.4.5.2.5).

In case the UE executes case a) or b):

1) if the UE supports ATSSS Low-Layer functionality with any steering mode as specified in subclause5.32.6 of 3GPPTS23.501[8], the UE shall set the ATSSS-ST bits to "ATSSS Low-Layer functionality with any steering mode supported" in the 5GSM capability IE of the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message;

2) if the UE supports MPTCP functionality with any steering mode and ATSSS-LL functionality with only Active-Standby steering mode as specified in subclause5.32.6 of 3GPPTS23.501[8], the UE shall set the ATSSS-ST bits to "MPTCP functionality with any steering mode and ATSSS-LL functionality with only Active-Standby steering mode supported" in the 5GSM capability IE of the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message;

3) if the UE supports MPTCP functionality with any steering mode and ATSSS-LL functionality with any steering mode as specified in subclause5.32.6 of 3GPPTS23.501[8], the UE shall set the ATSSS-ST bits to "MPTCP functionality with any steering mode and ATSSS-LL functionality with any steering mode supported" in the 5GSM capability IE of the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message; and

4) if a performance measurement function in the UE can perform access performance measurements using the QoS flow of the non-default QoS rule as specified in subclause5.32.5 of 3GPPTS23.501[8], the UE shall set the APMQF bit to "Access performance measurements per QoS flow supported" in the 5GSM capability IE of the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message.



Figure6.4.2.2.1: UE-requested PDU session modification procedure

6.4.2.3 UE-requested PDU session modification procedure accepted by the network

Upon receipt of a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message, if the SMF accepts the request to modify the PDU session, the SMF shall perform the network-requested PDU session modification procedure as specified in subclause6.3.2.

If the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message contains a Port management information container IE, the SMF shall handle the contents of the Port management information container IE as specified in 3GPPTS23.501[8] and 3GPPTS23.502[9].

6.4.2.4 UE-requested PDU session modification procedure not accepted by the network

6.4.2.4.1 General

Upon receipt of a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message, if the SMF does not accepts the request to modify the PDU session, the SMF shall create a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REJECT message.

The SMF shall set the 5GSM cause IE of the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REJECT message to indicate the reason for rejecting the PDU session modification.

The 5GSM cause IE typically indicates one of the following SM cause values:

#26 insufficient resources;

#29 user authentication or authorization failed;

#31 request rejected, unspecified;

#32 service option not supported;

#33 requested service option not subscribed;

#35 PTI already in use;

#37 5GS QoS not accepted;

#43 Invalid PDU session identity;

#44 Semantic errors in packet filter(s);

#45 Syntactical error in packet filter(s);

#46 out of LADN service area;

#59 unsupported 5QI value;

#67 insufficient resources for specific slice and DNN;

#69 insufficient resources for specific slice;

#83 Semantic error in the QoS operation;

#84 Syntactical error in the QoS operation; or

#95  111 protocol errors.

If the UE requests a PDU session modification for an LADN when the UE is located outside of the LADN service area, the SMF shall include the 5GSM cause value #46 "out of LADN service area" in the 5GSM cause IE of the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REJECT message.

If the Extended protocol configuration options IE of the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message indicates 3GPP PS data off UE status and the SMF detects the change of the 3GPP PS data off UE status, the SMF shall not include the 5GSM cause value #26 "insufficient resources", the 5GSM cause value #67 "insufficient resources for specific slice and DNN", the 5GSM cause value #69 "insufficient resources for specific slice" and the 5GSM cause value #46 "out of LADN service area" in the 5GSM cause IE of the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REJECT message.

If the UE initiates UE-requested PDU session modification procedure to modify the PDU session transferred from EPS to an MA PDU session with the Request type IE set to "MA PDU request" in the UL NAS TRANSPORT message as specified in 3GPPTS24.193[13B] and the SMF determines, based on operator policy and subscription information, that the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message is to be rejected, the SMF shall include the 5GSM cause value #33 "requested service option not subscribed" in the 5GSM cause IE of the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REJECT message.

NOTE: If the SMF determines, based on operator policy and subscription information, that the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message is to be accepted as single access PDU session, the ATSSS container IE cannot be included in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message.

The network may include a Back-off timer value IE in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REJECT message.

If the 5GSM cause value is #26"insufficient resources", #67 "insufficient resources for specific slice and DNN", or #69 "insufficient resources for specific slice" and the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message was received from a UE configured for high priority access in selected PLMN or the request type provided during the PDU session establishment is set to "initial emergency request" or "existing emergency PDU session", the network shall not include a Back-off timer value IE.

The SMF shall send the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REJECT message.

Upon receipt of a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REJECT message and a PDU session ID, using the NAS transport procedure as specified in subclause5.4.5, the UE shall stop timer T3581, release the allocated PTI value, and enter the state PROCEDURE TRANSACTION INACTIVE.

6.4.2.4.2 Handling of network rejection due to congestion control

If:

- the 5GSM cause value #26 "insufficient resources" and the Back-off timer value IE are included in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REJECT message; or

- an indication that the 5GSM message was not forwarded due to DNN based congestion control is received along a Back-off timer value and a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with the PDU session ID IE set to the PDU session ID of the PDU session;

the UE shall ignore the Re-attempt indicator IE or the 5GSM congestion re-attempt indicator IE provided by the network, if any, and the UE shall take different actions depending on the timer value received for timer T3396 in the Back-off timer value IE or depending on the Back-off timer value received from the 5GMM sublayer (if the UE is a UE configured for high priority access in selected PLMN, exceptions are specified in subclause6.2.7):

a) If the timer value indicates neither zero nor deactivated and a DNN was provided during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall stop timer T3396 associated with the corresponding DNN, if it is running. If the timer value indicates neither zero nor deactivated and no DNN was provided during the PDU session establishment and the request type was different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", the UE shall stop timer T3396 associated with no DNN if it is running. The UE shall then start timer T3396 with the value provided in the Back-off timer value IE or with the Back-off timer value received from the 5GMM sublayer and:

1) shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message, or PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with exception of those identified in subclause6.4.2.1, for the same DNN that was sent by the UE, until timer T3396 expires or timer T3396 is stopped; and

2) shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message without a DNN and with request type different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", or another PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with exception of those identified in subclause6.4.2.1, for a non-emergency PDU session established without a DNN provided by the UE, if no DNN was provided during the PDU session establishment and the request type was different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", until timer T3396 expires or timer T3396 is stopped.

 The UE shall not stop timer T3396 upon a PLMN change or inter-system change.

b) if the timer value indicates that this timer is deactivated and a DNN was provided during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall stop timer T3396 associated with the corresponding DNN, if it is running. If the timer value indicates that this timer is deactivated and no DNN was provided during the PDU session establishment and the request type was different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", the UE shall stop timer T3396 associated with no DNN if it is running. The UE:

1) shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message or PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST with exception of those identified in subclause6.4.2.1, for the same DNN until the UE is switched off, the USIM is removed, the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated, or the UE receives a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message for the same DNN from the network, or a PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message for the same DNN from the network, or a PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message without the Back-off timer value IE for the same DNN from the network; and

2) shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message without a DNN and with request type different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", or another PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with exception of those identified in subclause6.4.2.1, for a non-emergency PDU session established without a DNN provided by the UE, if no DNN was provided during the PDU session establishment and the request type was different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", until the UE is switched off, the USIM is removed, the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated, or the UE receives a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message for a non-emergency PDU session established without a DNN provided by the UE, a PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message for a non-emergency PDU session established without a DNN provided by the UE, or a PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message without the Back-off timer value IE for a non-emergency PDU session established without a DNN provided by the UE.

 The timer T3396 remains deactivated upon a PLMN change or inter-system change.

c) if the timer value indicates zero, the UE:

1) shall stop timer T3396 associated with the corresponding DNN, if running, and may send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message or PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message for the same DNN; and

2) if no DNN was provided during the PDU session establishment and the request type was different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", the UE shall stop timer T3396 associated with no DNN, if running, and may send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message without a DNN, or another PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message without a DNN provided by the UE.

If the Back-off timer value IE is not included or no Back-off timer value is received from the 5GMM sublayer, then the UE may send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message or PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message for the same DNN or without a DNN.

If the timer T3396 is running when the UE enters state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED, the UE remains switched on, and the USIM in the UE (if any) remains the same and the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the SNPN to which timer T3396 is associated (if any) is not updated, then timer T3396 is kept running until it expires or it is stopped

When the timer T3396 is running or the timer is deactivated, the UE is allowed to initiate a PDU session establishment procedure for emergency services.

If the UE is switched off when the timer T3396 is running, and if the USIM in the UE (if any) remains the same and the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the SNPN to which timer T3396 is associated (if any) is not updated when the UE is switched on, the UE shall behave as follows:

- let t1 be the time remaining for T3396 timeout at switch off and let t be the time elapsed between switch off and switch on. If t1 is greater than t, then the timer shall be restarted with the value t1  t. If t1 is equal to or less than t, then the timer need not be restarted. If the UE is not capable of determining t, then the UE shall restart the timer with the value t1.

If the UE is a UE operating in single-registration mode in a network supporting N26 interface and the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message was sent for a PDN connection established when in S1 mode after an inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode and timer T3396 associated with the corresponding DNN (or no DNN) is running, then the UE shall re-initiate the UE-requested PDU session modification procedure after expiry of timer T3396.

If:

- the 5GSM cause value #67 "insufficient resources for specific slice and DNN" and the Back-off timer value IE are included in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REJECT message; or

- an indication that the 5GSM message was not forwarded due to S-NSSAI and DNN based congestion control is received along a Back-off timer value and a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with the PDU session ID IE set to the PDU session ID of the PDU session;

the UE shall ignore the Re-attempt indicator IE provided by the network, if any, and take different actions depending on the timer value received for timer T3584 in the Back-off timer value IE or depending on the Back-off timer value received from the 5GMM sublayer (if the UE is a UE configured for high priority access in selected PLMN, exceptions are specified in subclause6.2.8):

a) If the timer value indicates neither zero nor deactivated, and both an S-NSSAI and a DNN were provided by the UE during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall stop timer T3584 associated with the [S-NSSAI of the PDU session, DNN] combination, if it is running. If the timer value indicates neither zero nor deactivated, an S-NSSAI and no DNN was provided during the PDU session establishment and the request type was different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", the UE shall stop timer T3584 associated with [S-NSSAI of the PDU session, no DNN] combination, if it is running. If the timer value indicates neither zero nor deactivated, no S-NSSAI and a DNN was provided during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall stop timer T3584 associated with the [no S-NSSAI, DNN] combination, if it is running. If the timer value indicates neither zero nor deactivated and neither S-NSSAI nor DNN was provided during the PDU session establishment and the request type was different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", the UE shall stop timer T3584 associated with the [no S-NSSAI, no DNN] combination, if it is running. The timer T3584 to be stopped includes the timer T3584 applied for all the PLMNs, if running, and the timer T3584 applied for the registered PLMN, if running. The UE shall then start timer T3584 with the value provided in the Back-off timer value IE or with the Back-off timer value received from the 5GMM sublayer and:

1) shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message or PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with the exception of those identified in subclause6.4.2.1, for the [S-NSSAI, DNN] combination, until timer T3584 expires or timer T3584 is stopped;

2) shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message with request type different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", or another PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with the exception of those identified in subclause6.4.2.1, for the [S-NSSAI of the PDU session, no DNN] combination, if no DNN was provided during the PDU session establishment, until timer T3584 expires or timer T3584 is stopped;

3) shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message, or another PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with the exception of those identified in subclause6.4.2.1, for the [no S-NSSAI, DNN] combination, if no S-NSSAI was provided during the PDU session establishment, until timer T3584 expires or timer T3584 is stopped; and

4) shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message with request type different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", or another PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with the exception of those identified in subclause6.4.2.1, for the [no S-NSSAI, no DNN] combination, if neither S-NSSAI nor DNN was provided during the PDU session establishment, until timer T3584 expires or timer T3584 is stopped.

 The UE shall not stop timer T3584 upon a PLMN change or inter-system change;

b) if the timer value indicates that this timer is deactivated:

1) if both S-NSSAI and DNN were provided by the UE during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall stop timer T3584 associated with the [S-NSSAI of the PDU session, DNN] combination (including the timer T3584 applied for all the PLMNs, if running, and the timer T3584 applied for the registered PLMN, if running), if it is running. The UE shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message or PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with exception of those identified in subclause6.4.2.1, for the [S-NSSAI of the PDU session, DNN] combination that was sent by the UE, until the UE is switched off, the USIM is removed, the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated, or the UE receives a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message for the [S-NSSAI of the PDU session, DNN] combination from the network, or a PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message for the [S-NSSAI of the PDU session, DNN] combination from the network, or a PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message without the Back-off timer value IE for the [S-NSSAI of the PDU session, DNN] combination from the network;

2) if an S-NSSAI was provided but a DNN was not provided by the UE during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall stop timer T3584 associated with the [S-NSSAI of the PDU session, no DNN] combination (including the timer T3584 applied for all the PLMNs, if running, and the timer T3584 applied for the registered PLMN, if running), if it is running. The UE shall not send a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message with request type different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", or a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with exception of those identified in subclause6.4.2.1, for the [S-NSSAI of the PDU session, no DNN] combination, if no DNN was provided during the PDU session establishment, until the UE is switched off, the USIM is removed, the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated, or the UE receives a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message for a non-emergency PDU session established for the [S-NSSAI of the PDU session, no DNN] combination from the network, or a PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message for a non-emergency PDU session established for the [S-NSSAI of the PDU session, no DNN] combination from the network, or a PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message without the Back-off timer value IE for a non-emergency PDU session established for the [S-NSSAI of the PDU session, no DNN] combination from the network;

3) if an S-NSSAI was not provided but a DNN was provided by the UE during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall stop timer T3584 associated with the [no S-NSSAI, DNN] combination (including the timer T3584 applied for all the PLMNs, if running, and the timer T3584 applied for the registered PLMN, if running), if it is running. The UE shall not send a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message, or a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with exception of those identified in subclause6.4.2.1, for the [no S-NSSAI, DNN] combination, if no S-NSSAI was provided during the PDU session establishment, until the UE is switched off, the USIM is removed, the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated, or the UE receives a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message for the [no S-NSSAI, DNN] combination from the network, or a PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message for the [no S-NSSAI, DNN] combination from the network, or a PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message without the Back-off timer value IE for the [no S-NSSAI, DNN] combination from the network; and

4) if neither S-NSSAI nor DNN were provided by the UE during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall stop timer T3584 associated with the [no S-NSSAI, no DNN] combination (including the timer T3584 applied for all the PLMNs, if running, and the timer T3584 applied for the registered PLMN, if running), if it is running. The UE shall not send a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message with request type different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", or a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with exception of those identified in subclause6.4.2.1, for the [no S-NSSAI, no DNN] combination, if neither S-NSSAI nor DNN was provided during the PDU session establishment, until the UE is switched off, the USIM is removed, the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated, or the UE receives a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message for a non-emergency PDU session established for the [no S-NSSAI, no DNN] combination from the network, or a PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message for a non-emergency PDU session established for the [no S-NSSAI, no DNN] combination from the network, or a PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message without the Back-off timer value IE for a non-emergency PDU session established for the [no S-NSSAI, no DNN] combination from the network.

 The timer T3584 remains deactivated upon a PLMN change or inter-system change; and

c) if the timer value indicates zero:

1) if both S-NSSAI and DNN were provided by the UE during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall stop timer T3584 associated with the [S-NSSAI of the PDU session, DNN] combination (including the timer T3584 applied for all the PLMNs, if running, and the timer T3584 applied for the registered PLMN, if running), if it is running. The UE may send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message or PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message for the [S-NSSAI of the PDU session, DNN] combination;

2) if an S-NSSAI was provided but a DNN was not provided by the UE during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall stop timer T3584 associated with the [S-NSSAI of the PDU session, no DNN] combination (including the timer T3584 applied for all the PLMNs, if running, and the timer T3584 applied for the registered PLMN, if running), if it is running. The UE may send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message, or PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message for the [S-NSSAI of the PDU session, no DNN] combination if the request type was different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session";

3) if an S-NSSAI was not provided but a DNN was provided by the UE during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall stop timer T3584 associated with the [no S-NSSAI, DNN] combination (including the timer T3584 applied for all the PLMNs, if running, and the timer T3584 applied for the registered PLMN, if running), if it is running. The UE may send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message, or PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message for the [no S-NSSAI, DNN] combination; and

4) if neither S-NSSAI nor DNN were provided by the UE during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall stop timer T3584 associated with the [no S-NSSAI, no DNN] combination (including the timer T3584 applied for all the PLMNs, if running, and the timer T3584 applied for the registered PLMN, if running), if it is running. The UE may send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message, or PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message for the [no S-NSSAI, no DNN] combination and the request type was different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session".

If the 5GSM congestion re-attempt indicator IE with the ABO bit set to "The back-off timer is applied in all PLMNs " is included in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REJECT message with the 5GSM cause value #67 "insufficient resources for specific slice and DNN", then the UE shall apply the timer T3584 for all the PLMNs. Otherwise, the UE shall apply the timer T3584 for the registered PLMN.

If the Back-off timer value IE is not included or no Back-off timer value is received from the 5GMM sublayer, then the UE may send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message or PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message for the same [S-NSSAI, DNN] combination, or for the same [S-NSSAI, no DNN] combination, or for the same [no S-NSSAI, DNN] combination, or for the same [no S-NSSAI, no DNN] combination.

When the timer T3584 is running or the timer is deactivated, the UE is allowed to initiate a PDU session establishment procedure for emergency services.

If the timer T3584 is running when the UE enters state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED, the UE remains switched on, and the USIM in the UE (if any) remains the same and the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the SNPN to which timer T3584 is associated (if any) is not updated, then timer T3584 is kept running until it expires or it is stopped.

If the UE is switched off when the timer T3584 is running, and if the USIM in the UE (if any) remains the same and the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the SNPN to which timer T3584 is associated (if any) is not updated when the UE is switched on, the UE shall behave as follows:

- let t1 be the time remaining for T3584 timeout at switch off and let t be the time elapsed between switch off and switch on. If t1 is greater than t, then the timer shall be restarted with the value t1  t. If t1 is equal to or less than t, then the timer need not be restarted. If the UE is not capable of determining t, then the UE shall restart the timer with the value t1.

If the UE is a UE operating in single-registration mode in a network supporting N26 interface and the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message was sent for a PDN connection established when in S1 mode after an inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode and timer T3584 associated with the corresponding [no S-NSSAI, DNN] combination or [no S-NSSAI, no DNN] combination is running, then the UE shall re-initiate the UE-requested PDU session modification procedure after expiry of timer T3584.

If:

- the 5GSM cause value #69 "insufficient resources for specific slice" and the Back-off timer value IE are included in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REJECT message; or

- an indication that the 5GSM message was not forwarded due to S-NSSAI only based congestion control is received along a Back-off timer value and a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with the PDU session ID IE set to the PDU session ID of the PDU session;

the UE shall ignore the bit "RATC" and the bit "EPLMNC" in the Re-attempt indicator IE provided by the network, if any, and take different actions depending on the timer value received for timer T3585 in the Back-off timer value IE or depending on the Back-off timer value received from the 5GMM sublayer (if the UE is a UE configured for high priority access in selected PLMN, exceptions are specified in subclause6.2.8):

a) If the timer value indicates neither zero nor deactivated and an S-NSSAI was provided during the PDU session establishment and the request type was different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", the UE shall stop timer T3585 associated with the S-NSSAI of the PDU session, if it is running. If the timer value indicates neither zero nor deactivated and no S-NSSAI was provided during the PDU session establishment and the request type was different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", the UE shall stop timer T3585 associated with no S-NSSAI if it is running. The timer T3585 to be stopped includes the timer T3585 applied for all the PLMNs, if running, and the timer T3585 applied for the registered PLMN, if running. The UE shall then start timer T3585 with the value provided in the Back-off timer value IE or with the Back-off timer value received from the 5GMM sublayer and:

1) if an S-NSSAI was provided by the UE during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message with request type different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", or another PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with exception of those identified in subclause6.4.2.1, for a non-emergency PDU session for the S-NSSAI of the PDU session, until timer T3585 expires or timer T3585 is stopped; and

2) if the request type was different from "initial emergency request" and from "existing emergency PDU session", and an S-NSSAI was not provided by the UE during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message without an S-NSSAI and with request type different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", or another PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with exception of those identified in subclause6.4.2.1, for a non-emergency PDU session established without an S-NSSAI provided by the UE, , until timer T3585 expires or timer T3585 is stopped.

 The UE shall not stop timer T3585 upon a PLMN change or inter-system change;

b) if the timer value indicates that this timer is deactivated and an S-NSSAI was provided during the PDU session establishment and the request type was different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", the UE shall stop timer T3585 associated with the S-NSSAI of the PDU session, if it is running. If the timer value indicates that this timer is deactivated and no S-NSSAI was provided during the PDU session establishment and the request type was different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", the UE shall stop timer T3585 associated with no S-NSSAI if it is running. The timer T3585 to be stopped includes the timer T3585 applied for all the PLMNs, if running, and the timer T3585 applied for the registered PLMN, if running. In addition:

1) if an S-NSSAI was provided by the UE during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message with request type different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", or another PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST with exception of those identified in subclause6.4.2.1, for a non-emergency PDU session for the S-NSSAI of the PDU session until the UE is switched off, the USIM is removed, the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated, or the UE receives a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message for a non-emergency PDU session for the S-NSSAI of the PDU session from the network, or a PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message for a non-emergency PDU session for the S-NSSAI of the PDU session from the network, or a PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message without the Back-off timer value IE for the S-NSSAI of the PDU session from the network; and

2) if the request type was different from "initial emergency request" and from "existing emergency PDU session", and an S-NSSAI was not provided by the UE during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall not send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message without an S-NSSAI and with request type different from "initial emergency request" and different from "existing emergency PDU session", or another PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with exception of those identified in subclause6.4.2.1, for a non-emergency PDU session established without an S-NSSAI provided by the UE, until the UE is switched off, the USIM is removed, the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated, or the UE receives a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message for a non-emergency PDU session established without an S-NSSAI provided by the UE, or a PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message for a non-emergency PDU session established without an S-NSSAI provided by the UE, or a PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message without the Back-off timer value IE for a non-emergency PDU session established without an S-NSSAI provided by the UE.

 The timer T3585 remains deactivated upon a PLMN change or inter-system change; and

c) if the timer value indicates zero:

1) if an S-NSSAI was provided by the UE during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall stop timer T3585 associated with the S-NSSAI of the PDU session (including the timer T3585 applied for all the PLMNs, if running, and the timer T3585 applied for the registered PLMN, if running), if running, and may send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message or PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message for the S-NSSAI of the PDU session; and

2) if no S-NSSAI was provided during the PDU session establishment and the request type was different from "initial emergency request " and different from "existing emergency PDU session", the UE shall stop timer T3585 associated with no S-NSSAI (including the timer T3585 applied for all the PLMNs, if running, and the timer T3585 applied for the registered PLMN, if running), if running, and may send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message without an S-NSSAI, or another PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message without an S-NSSAI provided by the UE.

If the 5GSM congestion re-attempt indicator IE with the ABO bit set to "The back-off timer is applied in all PLMNs" is included in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REJECT message with the 5GSM cause value #69 "insufficient resources for specific slice", then the UE shall apply the timer T3585 for all the PLMNs. Otherwise, the UE shall apply the timer T3585 for the registered PLMN.

If the Back-off timer value IE is not included or no Back-off timer value is received from the 5GMM sublayer, then the UE may send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message or PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message for the same S-NSSAI or without an S-NSSAI.

When the timer T3585 is running or the timer is deactivated, the UE is allowed to initiate a PDU session establishment procedure for emergency services.

If the timer T3585 is running when the UE enters state 5GMM-DEREGISTERED, the UE remains switched on, and the USIM in the UE (if any) remains the same and the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the SNPN to which timer T3585 is associated (if any) is not updated, then timer T3585 is kept running until it expires or it is stopped.

If the UE is switched off when the timer T3585 is running, and if the USIM in the UE (if any) remains the same and the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the SNPN to which timer T3585 is associated (if any) is not updated when the UE is switched on, the UE shall behave as follows:

- let t1 be the time remaining for T3585 timeout at switch off and let t be the time elapsed between switch off and switch on. If t1 is greater than t, then the timer shall be restarted with the value t1  t. If t1 is equal to or less than t, then the timer need not be restarted. If the UE is not capable of determining t, then the UE shall restart the timer with the value t1.

If the UE is a UE operating in single-registration mode in a network supporting N26 interface and the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message was sent for a PDN connection established when in S1 mode after an inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode and timer T3585 associated with no S-NSSAI is running, then the UE shall re-initiate the UE-requested PDU session modification procedure after expiry of timer T3585.

NOTE3: As described in this subclause, upon PLMN change or inter-system change, the UE does not stop the timer T3584 or T3585. This means the timer T3584 or T3585 can still be running or be deactivated for the given 5GSM procedure, the PLMN, the S-NSSAI and optionally the DNN combination when the UE returns to the PLMN or when it performs inter-system change back from S1 mode to N1 mode. Thus the UE can still be prevented from sending another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST or PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message in the PLMN for the same S-NSSAI and optionally the same DNN.

Upon PLMN change, if T3584 is running or is deactivated for an S-NSSAI, a DNN, and old PLMN, but T3584 is not running and is not deactivated for the S-NSSAI, the DNN, and new PLMN, then the UE is allowed to send a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message for the same S-NSSAI and the same DNN in the new PLMN.

Upon PLMN change, if T3585 is running or is deactivated for an S-NSSAI and old PLMN, but T3585 is not running and is not deactivated for the S-NSSAI and new PLMN, then the UE is allowed to send a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message for the same S-NSSAI in the new PLMN.

6.4.2.4.3 Handling of network rejection not due to congestion control

If the 5GSM cause value is different from #26 "insufficient resources", #37 "5GS QoS not accepted", #44 "Semantic errors in packet filter(s)", #45 "Syntactical error in packet filter(s)", #46 "out of LADN service area", #59 "unsupported 5QI value", #67 "insufficient resources for specific slice and DNN", #69 "insufficient resources for specific slice", #83 "Semantic error in the QoS operation", and #84 "Syntactical error in the QoS operation", and the Back-off timer value IE is included, the UE shall behave as follows: (if the UE is a UE configured for high priority access in selected PLMN, exceptions are specified in subclause6.2.12):

a) if the timer value indicates neither zero nor deactivated and:

1) if the UE provided DNN and S-NSSAI to the network during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall start the back-off timer with the value provided in the Back-off timer value IE for the PDU session modification procedure and [PLMN, DNN, (mapped) HPLMN S-NSSAI of the PDU session] combination. The UE shall not send another PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with exception of those identified in subclause6.4.2.1, for the same DNN and the (mapped) HPLMN S-NSSAI of the PDU session in the current PLMN, until the back-off timer expires, the UE is switched off, the USIM is removed, or the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated; or

2) if the UE did not provide a DNN or S-NSSAI or any of the two parameters to the network during the PDU session establishment, it shall start the back-off timer accordingly for the PDU session modification procedure and the [PLMN, DNN, no S-NSSAI], [PLMN, no DNN, (mapped) HPLMN S-NSSAI of the PDU session] or [PLMN, no DNN, no S-NSSAI] combination. Dependent on the combination, the UE shall not send another PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with exception of those identified in subclause6.4.2.1, for the same [PLMN, DNN, no S-NSSAI], [PLMN, no DNN, (mapped) HPLMN S-NSSAI of the PDU session] or [PLMN, no DNN, no S-NSSAI] combination in the current PLMN, until the back-off timer expires, the UE is switched off, the USIM is removed, or the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated;

b) if the timer value indicates that this timer is deactivated and:

1) if the UE provided DNN and S-NSSAI to the network during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall not send another PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with exception of those identified in subclause6.4.2.1, for the same DNN and the (mapped) HPLMN S-NSSAI of the PDU session in the current PLMN, until the UE is switched off, the USIM is removed, or the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated; or

2) if the UE did not provide a DNN or S-NSSAI or any of the two parameters to the network during the PDU session establishment, the UE shall not send another PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with exception of those identified in subclause6.4.2.1, for the same [PLMN, DNN, no S-NSSAI], [PLMN, no DNN, (mapped) HPLMN S-NSSAI of the PDU session] or [PLMN, no DNN, no S-NSSAI] combination in the current PLMN, until the UE is switched off, the USIM is removed, or the entry in the "list of subscriber data" for the current SNPN is updated; and

c) if the timer value indicates zero, the UE may send another PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message for the same combination of [PLMN, DNN, (mapped) HPLMN S-NSSAI of the PDU session], [PLMN, DNN, no S-NSSAI], [PLMN, no DNN, (mapped) HPLMN S-NSSAI of the PDU session], or [PLMN, no DNN, no S-NSSAI] in the current PLMN.

If the Back-off timer value IE is not included, then the UE shall ignore the Re-attempt indicator IE provided by the network in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REJECT message, if any.

a) Additionally, if the 5GSM cause value is #32 "service option not supported", or #33 "requested service option not subscribed", then:

1) the UE not operating in SNPN access operation mode shall proceed as follows:

i) if the UE is registered in the HPLMN or in a PLMN that is within the EHPLMN list, the UE shall behave as described above in the present subclause using the configured SM Retry Timer value as specified in 3GPPTS24.368[17] or in USIM file NASCONFIG as specified in 3GPPTS31.102[22], if available, as back-off timer value; and

NOTE1: The way to choose one of the configured SM Retry Timer values for back-off timer value is up to UE implementation if the UE is configured with:
- an SM Retry Timer value in the ME as specified in 3GPPTS24.368[17]; and
- an SM Retry Timer value in USIM file NASCONFIG as specified in 3GPPTS31.102[22].

ii) otherwise, if the UE is not registered in its HPLMN or in a PLMN that is within the EHPLMN list, or if the SM Retry Timer value is not configured, the UE shall behave as described above in the present subclause, using the default value of 12 minutes for the back-off timer; or

2) the UE operating in SNPN access operation mode shall proceed as follows:

i) if:

A) the SM Retry Timer value for the current SNPN as specified in 3GPPTS24.368[17] is available; or

B) the SM Retry Timer value in USIM file NASCONFIG as specified in 3GPPTS31.102[22] is available and the UE used the USIM for registration to the current SNPN;

 then the UE shall behave as described above in the present subclause using the configured SM Retry Timer value as back-off timer value; or

NOTE2: The way to choose one of the configured SM Retry Timer values for back-off timer value is up to UE implementation if both conditions in bullets A) and B) above are satisfied.

ii) otherwise, the UE shall behave as described above in the present subclause, using the default value of 12 minutes for the back-off timer.

b) For 5GSM cause values different from #32 "service option not supported", or #33 "requested service option not subscribed", the UE behaviour regarding the start of a back-off timer is unspecified.

The UE shall not stop any back-off timer:

a) upon a PLMN change;

b) upon an inter-system change; or

c) upon registration over another access type.

If the network indicates that a back-off timer for the PDU session modification procedure is deactivated, then it remains deactivated:

a) upon a PLMN change;

b) upon an inter-system change; or

c) upon registration over another access type.

NOTE3: This means the back-off timer can still be running or be deactivated for the given 5GSM procedure when the UE returns to the PLMN or when it performs inter-system change back from S1 mode to N1 mode. Thus the UE can still be prevented from sending another PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message for the combination of [PLMN, DNN, (mapped) HPLMN S-NSSAI of the PDU session], [PLMN, DNN, no S-NSSAI], [PLMN, no DNN, (mapped) HPLMN S-NSSAI of the PDU session], or [PLMN, no DNN, no S-NSSAI] in the PLMN.

If the back-off timer is started upon receipt of a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REJECT (i.e. the timer value was provided by the network, a configured value is available or the default value is used as explained above) or the back-off timer is deactivated, the UE behaves as follows:

a) after a PLMN change the UE may send a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message for the combination of [new PLMN, DNN, (mapped) HPLMN S-NSSAI of the PDU session], [new PLMN, DNN, no S-NSSAI], [new PLMN, no DNN, (mapped) HPLMN S-NSSAI of the PDU session], or [new PLMN, no DNN, no S-NSSAI] in the new PLMN, if the back-off timer is not running and is not deactivated for the PDU session modification procedure and the combination of [new PLMN, DNN, (mapped) HPLMN S-NSSAI of the PDU session], [new PLMN, DNN, no S-NSSAI], [new PLMN, no DNN, (mapped) HPLMN S-NSSAI of the PDU session], or [new PLMN, no DNN, no S-NSSAI];

 Furthermore, as an implementation option, for the 5GSM cause value #32 "service option not supported" or #33 "requested service option not subscribed", if the network does not include a Re-attempt indicator IE, the UE may decide not to automatically send another PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST  message for the same combination of [PLMN, DNN, (mapped) HPLMN S-NSSAI of the PDU session], [PLMN, DNN, no S-NSSAI], [PLMN, no DNN, (mapped) HPLMN S-NSSAI of the PDU session], or [PLMN, no DNN, no S-NSSAI], if the UE is registered to a new PLMN which is in the list of equivalent PLMNs.

b) if the network does not include the Re-attempt indicator IE to indicate whether re-attempt in S1 mode is allowed, or the UE ignores the Re-attempt indicator IE, e.g. because the Back-off timer value IE is not included, then:

1) if the UE is registered in its HPLMN or in a PLMN that is within the EHPLMN list and the back-off timer is running for the combination of [PLMN, DNN, (mapped) HPLMN S-NSSAI of the PDU session] or [PLMN DNN, no S-NSSAI], the UE shall apply the configured SM_RetryAtRATChange value as specified in 3GPPTS24.368[17] or in USIM file NASCONFIG as specified in 3GPPTS31.102[22], if available, to determine whether the UE may attempt an EPS bearer resource allocation procedure or an EPS bearer resource modification procedure for the same [PLMN, DNN] combination in S1 mode; and

NOTE4: The way to choose one of the configured SM_RetryAtRATChange values for back-off timer value is up to UE implementation if the UE is configured with:
- an SM_RetryAtRATChange value in ME as specified in 3GPPTS24.368[17]; and
- an SM_RetryAtRATChange value in USIM file NASCONFIG as specified in 3GPPTS31.102[22].

2) if the UE is not registered in its HPLMN or in a PLMN that is within the EHPLMN list, or if the NAS configuration MO as specified in 3GPPTS24.368[17] is not available and the value for inter-system change is not configured in the USIM file NASCONFIG, then the UE behaviour regarding an EPS bearer resource allocation procedure or an EPS bearer resource modification procedure for the same [PLMN, DNN] combination in S1 mode is unspecified; and

c) if the network includes the Re-attempt indicator IE indicating that re-attempt in an equivalent PLMN is not allowed, then depending on the timer value received in the Back-off timer value IE, for each combination of a PLMN from the equivalent PLMN list and the respective [DNN, (mapped) HPLMN S-NSSAI of the PDU session], [DNN, no S-NSSAI], [no DNN, (mapped) HPLMN S-NSSAI of the PDU session], or [no DNN, no S-NSSAI] combination, the UE shall start a back-off timer for the PDU session modification procedure with the value provided by the network, or deactivate the respective back-off timer as follows:

1) if the Re-attempt indicator IE additionally indicates that re-attempt in S1 mode is allowed, the UE shall start or deactivate the back-off timer for N1 mode only; and

2) otherwise, the UE shall start or deactivate the back-off timer for S1 and N1 mode.

If the back-off timer for a [PLMN, DNN] or [PLMN, no DNN] combination was started or deactivated in S1 mode upon receipt of BEARER RESOURCE ALLOCATION REJECT message or BEARER RESOURCE MODIFICATION REJECT message (see 3GPPTS24.301[15]) and the network indicated that re-attempt in N1 mode is allowed, then this back-off timer does not prevent the UE from sending a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message in this PLMN for the same DNN after inter-system change to N1 mode. If the network indicated that re-attempt in N1 mode is not allowed, the UE shall not send any PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with exception of those identified in subclause6.4.2.1, in this PLMN for the same DNN in combination with any S-NSSAI or without S-NSSAI, after inter-system change to N1 mode until the timer expires, the UE is switched off or the USIM is removed.

NOTE5: The back-off timer is used to describe a logical model of the required UE behaviour. This model does not imply any specific implementation, e.g. as a timer or timestamp.

NOTE6: Reference to back-off timer in this section can either refer to use of timer T3396 or to use of a different packet system specific timer within the UE. Whether the UE uses T3396 as a back-off timer or it uses different packet system specific timers as back-off timers is left up to UE implementation.

If the 5GSM cause value is #46 "out of LADN service area", the UE shall ignore the Back-off timer value IE and Re-attempt indicator IE provided by the network, if any. If the UE is not located inside the LADN service area, the UE shall not send another PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message or another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message for the LADN DNN provided by the UE during the PDU session establishment procedure until the LADN information for the specific LADN DNN is updated as described in subclause5.4.4 and subclause5.5.1. If the UE is not located inside the LADN service area, the UE shall not indicate the PDU session(s) for the LADN DNN provided by the UE during the PDU session establishment procedure in the Uplink data status IE included in the SERVICE REQUEST message until the LADN information for the specific LADN DNN is provided by network as described in subclause5.4.4 and subclause5.5.1.

NOTE7: Based on UE implementation, the UE locating inside the LADN service area can send another PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message or PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message for the LADN DNN which was rejected with the 5GSM cause value #46 "out of LADN service area".

If the 5GSM cause value is #37 "5GS QoS not accepted", #44 "Semantic errors in packet filter(s)", #45 "Syntactical error in packet filter(s)", #59 "unsupported 5QI value", #83 "Semantic error in the QoS operation" or #84 "Syntactical error in the QoS operation", the UE shall ignore the Back-off timer value IE and Re-attempt indicator IE provided by the network, if any. The UE should pass the corresponding error cause to the upper layers.

NOTE8: How to solve the issues of not accepted 5GS QoS and unsupported 5QI value in the upper layers is UE implementation specific.

6.4.2.5 Abnormal cases in the UE

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a) Expiry of timer T3581.

 The UE shall, on the first expiry of the timer T3581, retransmit the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message and the PDU session information which was transported together with the initial transmission of the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message and shall reset and start timer T3581. This retransmission is repeated four times, i.e. on the fifth expiry of timer T3581, the UE shall abort the procedure and shall release the allocated PTI.

b) Invalid PDU session identity.

 Upon receipt of the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REJECT message including 5GSM cause #43 "invalid PDU session identity", the UE shall perform a local release of the existing PDU session and shall stop the timer T3581.

c) Collision of network-requested PDU session release procedure and UE-requested PDU session modification procedure.

 If the UE receives a PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message during the UE-requested PDU session modification procedure, and the PDU session indicated in the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message is the PDU session that the UE had requested to modify, the UE shall abort the PDU session modification procedure and proceed with the network-requested PDU session release procedure.

d) Handling DL user data packets marked with RQI when UE has already revoked the usage of reflective QoS

 If the UE receives a DL user data packet marked with a RQI and the DL user data packet belongs to a PDU session of IPv4, IPv6, IPv4v6 or Ethernet PDU session type for which the UE has already revoked the usage of reflective QoS, then the UE shall ignore the RQI and shall handle the received DL user data packet.

e) Collision of network-requested PDU session modification procedure and UE-requested PDU session modification procedure.

 The handling of the same abnormal case as described in subclause6.3.2.6 applies.

f) Upon receiving an indication that the 5GSM message was not forwarded due to service area restrictions along with a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with the PDU session ID IE set to the same value as the PDU session ID that was sent by the UE, the UE shall abort the procedure and shall stop the timer T3581.

g) Upon receiving an indication that the 5GSM message was not forwarded due to routing failure along with a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with the PDU session ID IE set to the same value as the PDU session ID that was sent by the UE, the UE shall stop timer T3581 and shall abort the procedure.

ga) Upon receiving an indication that the 5GSM message was not forwarded because the UE accessing via a satellite NG-RAN cell is informed that the PLMN is not allowed to operate at the present UE location along with a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with the PDU session ID IE set to the same value as the PDU session ID that was sent by the UE, the UE shall stop timer T3581 and shall abort the procedure.

h) Collision of UE-requested PDU session modification procedure and N1 NAS signalling connection release

 The UE may immediately retransmit the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message and stop, reset and restart timer T3581, if the following conditions apply:

1) The original UE-requested PDU session modification procedure was initiated over an existing N1 NAS signalling connection; and

2) the previous transmission of the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message was not initiated due to timer T3581 expiry.

6.4.2.6 Abnormal cases on the network side

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a) If the PDU session is an emergency PDU session and the 5GSM cause IE is not included in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message which is not triggered according to subclause6.4.2.1, item e), or is set to a 5GSM cause other than the 5GSM causes #41, #42, #44, #45, #83, #84, and #85, the SMF shall reject the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message with 5GSM cause #31 "request rejected, unspecified".

b) PDU session inactive for the received PDU session identity.

 If the PDU session ID in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message belongs to any PDU session in state PDU SESSION INACTIVE in the SMF, the SMF shall set the 5GSM cause IE to #43 "Invalid PDU session identity" in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REJECT message.

c) Collision of network-requested PDU session modification procedure and UE-requested PDU session modification procedure.

 The handling of the same abnormal case as described in subclause6.3.2.5 applies.

d) AMF provides a "message was exempted from the DNN based congestion activated in the AMF" but the UE-requested PDU session modification procedure is not exempt from DNN based congestion control.

 If the SMF receives an exemptionInd attribute indicating "message was exempted from the DNN based congestion activated in the AMF" as specified in 3GPPTS29.502[20A], and the Extended protocol configuration options IE of the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message does not indicate 3GPP PS data off UE status, then the SMF shall set the 5GSM cause #26 "insufficient resources" in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REJECT message.

e) AMF provides a "message was exempted from the S-NSSAI and DNN based congestion activated in the AMF" but the UE-requested PDU session modification procedure is not exempt from S-NSSAI only based congestion control.

 If the SMF receives an exemptionInd attribute indicating "message was exempted from the S-NSSAI and DNN based congestion activated in the AMF" as specified in 3GPPTS29.502[20A], and the Extended protocol configuration options IE of the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message does not indicate 3GPP PS data off UE status, then the SMF shall set the 5GSM cause #67 "insufficient resources for specific slice and DNN" in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REJECT message.

f) AMF provides a "message was exempted from the S-NSSAI only based congestion activated in the AMF" but the UE-requested PDU session modification procedure is not exempt from S-NSSAI only based congestion control.

 If the SMF receives an exemptionInd attribute indicating "message was exempted from the S-NSSAI only based congestion activated in the AMF" as specified in 3GPPTS29.502[20A], and the Extended protocol configuration options IE of the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message does not indicate 3GPP PS data off UE status, then the SMF shall set the 5GSM cause #69 "insufficient resources for specific slice" in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REJECT message.

g) 5G access network cannot forward the message.

 If the SMF determines based on content of the n2SmInfo attribute specified in 3GPPTS29.502[20A] that the DL NAS TRANSPORT message carrying the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message was not forwarded to the UE by the 5G access network due to a cause other than handover procedure in progress, then the SMF shall reject the UE-requested PDU session modification procedure with an appropriate 5GSM cause value in the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REJECT message.

NOTE: The use of an appropriate 5GSM cause value is implementation specific.

6.4.3 UE-requested PDU session release procedure

6.4.3.1 General

The purpose of the UE-requested PDU session release procedure is to enable by the UE to request a release of a PDU session.

The UE is allowed to initiate the PDU session release procedure even if the timer T3396 is running.

The UE is allowed to initiate the PDU session release procedure even if the timer T3584 is running.

The UE is allowed to initiate the PDU session release procedure even if the timer T3585 is running.

The UE is allowed to initiate the PDU session release procedure even if the UE is outside the LADN service area.

6.4.3.2 UE-requested PDU session release procedure initiation

In order to initiate the UE-requested PDU session release procedure, the UE shall create a PDU SESSION RELEASE REQUEST message.

The UE may set the 5GSM cause IE of the PDU SESSION RELEASE REQUEST message to indicate the reason for releasing the PDU session.

The 5GSM cause IE typically indicates one of the following 5GSM cause values:

#26 insufficient resources;

#36 regular deactivation;

#44 Semantic errors in packet filter(s);

#45 Syntactical error in packet filter(s);

#83 Semantic error in the QoS operation;

#84 Syntactical error in the QoS operation;

#96 Invalid mandatory information.

The UE shall allocate a PTI value currently not used and shall set the PTI IE of the PDU SESSION RELEASE REQUEST message to the allocated PTI value.

The UE shall transport the PDU SESSION RELEASE REQUEST message and the PDU session ID, using the NAS transport procedure as specified in subclause5.4.5, and the UE shall start timer T3582 (see example in figure6.4.3.2.1).

If the UE is releasing the PDU session due to:

a) errors in QoS operations or packet filters; or

b) the number of the authorized QoS rules, the number of the packet filters, or the number of the authorized QoS flow descriptions associated with the PDU session have reached the maximum number supported by the UE,

the UE shall include the 5GSM cause IE in the PDU SESSION RELEASE REQUEST message as described in subclauses6.3.2.4 and 6.4.1.3.



Figure6.4.3.2.1: UE-requested PDU session release procedure

6.4.3.3 UE-requested PDU session release procedure accepted by the network

Upon receipt of a PDU SESSION RELEASE REQUEST message and a PDU session ID, if the SMF accepts the request to release the PDU session, and shall perform the network-requested PDU session release procedure as specified in subclause6.3.3.

6.4.3.4 UE-requested PDU session release procedure not accepted by the network

Upon receipt of a PDU SESSION RELEASE REQUEST message, if the SMF does not accept the request to release the PDU session, the SMF shall create a PDU SESSION RELEASE REJECT message.

The SMF shall set the 5GSM cause IE of the PDU SESSION RELEASE REJECT message to indicate the reason for rejecting the PDU session release.

The 5GSM cause IE typically indicates one of the following SM cause values:

#35 PTI already in use; or

#43 Invalid PDU session identity; or

#95  111: protocol errors.

The SMF shall send the PDU SESSION RELEASE REJECT message.

Upon receipt of a PDU SESSION RELEASE REJECT message and a PDU session ID, using the NAS transport procedure as specified in subclause5.4.5, the UE shall stop timer T3582, release the allocated PTI value and locally release the PDU session. If there is one or more MBS multicast sessions associated with the PDU session, the UE shall locally leave the associated MBS multicast sessions.

6.4.3.5 Abnormal cases in the UE

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a) Expiry of timer T3582.

 The UE shall, on the first expiry of the timer T3582, retransmit the PDU SESSION RELEASE REQUEST message  and the PDU session information which was transported together with the initial transmission of the PDU SESSION RELEASE REQUEST message and shall reset and start timer T3582. This retransmission is repeated four times, i.e. on the fifth expiry of timer T3582, the UE shall abort the procedure, release the allocated PTI, perform a local release of the PDU session, and perform the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update by sending a REGISTRATION REQUEST message including the PDU session status IE over each access that user plane resources have been established if the PDU session is an MA PDU session, or over the access the PDU session is associated with if the PDU session is a single access PDU session. If there is one or more MBS multicast sessions associated with the PDU session, the UE shall locally leave the associated MBS multicast sessions.

b) Collision of UE-requested PDU session release procedure and network-requested PDU session modification procedure.

 When the UE receives a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message during the UE-requested PDU session release procedure, and the PDU session indicated in PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message is the PDU session that the UE had requested to release, the UE shall ignore the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message and proceed with the PDU session release procedure.

c) Collision of UE-requested PDU session release procedure and network-requested PDU session release procedure.

 When the UE receives a PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message with the PTI IE set to "No procedure transaction identity assigned" during the UE-requested PDU session release procedure, the PDU session indicated in the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message is the same as the PDU session that the UE requests to release:

- if the Access type IE is included in the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message and the PDU session is an MA PDU session and having user-plane resources established on the access different from the access indicated in the Access type IE in the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message, the UE shall proceed both the UE-requested PDU session release procedure and network-requested PDU session release procedure; or

- otherwise, the UE shall abort the UE-requested PDU session release procedure and shall stop the timer T3582 and proceed with the network-requested PDU session release procedure.

d) Receipt of an indication that the 5GSM message was not forwarded due to routing failure

 Upon receiving an indication that the 5GSM message was not forwarded due to routing failure along with a PDU SESSION RELEASE REQUEST message with the PDU session ID IE set to the same value as the PDU session ID that was sent by the UE, the UE shall stop timer T3582, abort the procedure, release the allocated PTI, perform a local release of the PDU session, and perform the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update by sending a REGISTRATION REQUEST message including the PDU session status IE over each access that user plane resources have been established if the PDU session is an MA PDU session, or over the access the PDU session is associated with if the PDU session is a single access PDU session. If there is one or more MBS multicast sessions associated with the released PDU session, the UE shall locally leave the associated MBS multicast sessions.

e) PDU session release signalling restricted due to service area restriction

 The UE may delay the release of the PDU session until the UE is not restricted by service area restrictions, or it may release the allocated PTI, perform a local release of the PDU session, and include the PDU session status IE over each access that user plane resources have been established if the PDU session is an MA PDU session, or over the access the PDU session is associated with if the PDU session is a single access PDU when performing the next registration procedure.

f) Collision of UE-requested PDU session release procedure and N1 NAS signalling connection release

 The UE may immediately retransmit the PDU SESSION RELEASE REQUEST message and stop, reset and restart timer T3582, if the following conditions apply:

1) The original UE-requested PDU session release procedure was initiated over an existing N1 NAS signalling connection; and

2) the previous transmission of the PDU SESSION RELEASE REQUEST message was not initiated due to timer T3582 expiry.

g) Receipt of an indication that the 5GSM message was not forwarded due to the PLMN is not allowed to operate at the present UE location

 Upon receiving an indication that the 5GSM message was not forwarded because the UE accessing via a satellite NG-RAN cell is informed that the PLMN is not allowed to operate at the present UE location along with a PDU SESSION RELEASE REQUEST message with the PDU session ID IE set to the same value as the PDU session ID that was sent by the UE, the UE shall stop timer T3582, abort the procedure and locally release the PDU session.

6.4.3.6 Abnormal cases on the network side

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a) PDU session inactive for the received PDU session identity.

 If the PDU session ID in the PDU SESSION RELEASE REQUEST message belongs to any PDU session in state PDU SESSION INACTIVE in the SMF, the SMF shall send the PDU SESSION RELEASE REJECT message to the UE with the 5GSM cause #43 "Invalid PDU session identity".

6.5 5GSM status procedure

6.5.1 General

The purpose of the sending of the 5GSM STATUS message is to report at any time certain error conditions detected upon receipt of 5GSM protocol data. The 5GSM STATUS message can be sent by both the network and the UE (see example in figure6.5.1.1).



Figure6.5.1.1: 5GSM status procedure

6.5.2 5GSM status received in the UE

If the 5GSM entity of the UE receives a 5GSM STATUS message the UE shall take different actions depending on the received 5GSM cause value:

#47 PTI mismatch.

 The UE shall abort any ongoing 5GSM procedure related to the received PTI value and stop any related timer.

#81 invalid PTI value.

 The UE shall abort any ongoing 5GSM procedure related to the received PTI value and stop any related timer.

#97 Message type non-existent or not implemented.

 The UE shall abort any ongoing 5GSM procedure related to the PTI or PDU session ID and stop any related timer.

On receipt of a 5GSM STATUS message with any other 5GSM cause value no state transition and no specific action shall be taken as seen from the radio interface, i.e. local actions are possible.

6.5.3 5GSM status received in the SMF

If the SMF receives a 5GSM STATUS message the SMF shall take different actions depending on the received 5GSM cause value:

#43 invalid PDU session identity.

 The SMF shall abort any ongoing 5GSM procedure related to the PTI or PDU session ID, stop any related timer and locally release the PDU session indicated in the 5GSM STATUS message.

#47 PTI mismatch.

 The SMF shall abort any ongoing 5GSM procedure related to the received PTI value and stop any related timer.

 If the PTI indicated in the 5GSM STATUS message is related to a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message, the SMF shall perform a local release of the PDU session indicated in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message.

#81 invalid PTI value.

 The SMF shall abort any ongoing 5GSM procedure related to the received PTI value and stop any related timer.

#96 invalid mandatory information.

 The SMF shall abort any ongoing 5GSM procedure related to the PTI or PDU session ID and stop any related timer.

#97 message type non-existent or not implemented.

 The SMF shall abort any ongoing 5GSM procedure related to the PTI or PDU session ID and stop any related timer.

The local actions to be taken by the SMF on receipt of a 5GSM STATUS message with any other 5GSM cause value are implementation dependent.

6.6 Miscellaneous procedures

6.6.1 Exchange of extended protocol configuration options

The UE and the SMF can exchange protocol configuration options via 5GSM procedures.

The protocol configuration options shall be exchanged via the Extended protocol configuration options IE.

6.6.2 Remote UE report procedure

6.6.2.1 General

The purpose of the 5G ProSe remote UE report procedure is for a UE acting as a 5G ProSe layer-3 UE-to-network UE relay to notify the network that a 5G ProSe remote UE is connected to the 5G ProSe layer-3 UE-to-network relay UE or disconnected from the 5G ProSe layer-3 UE-to-network relay UE as specified in 3GPPTS23.304[6E].

The UE does not initiate the remote UE report procedure if the timer T3396 is running.

The UE does not initiate the remote UE report procedure if the timer T3584 is running.

The UE does not initiate the remote UE report procedure if the timer T3585 is running.

6.6.2.2 Remote UE report procedure initiation

In order to initiate the 5G ProSe remote UE report procedure, the UE shall create a REMOTE UE REPORT message.

The UE shall include information of newly connected or disconnected 5G ProSe remote UEs to the network in the REMOTE UE REPORT message by setting the values of the Remote UE context connected IE or the Remote UE context disconnected IE to the 5G ProSe remote UE identities that are being connected or disconnected, respectively.

Editor's note: It is FFS what are the types of 5G ProSe remote UE identities that can be included in the REMOTE UE REPORT message as this is waiting for stage-2 definitions.

The UE shall set the PDU session ID IE to the value of the PDU session associated with the 5G ProSe remote UE connected to the 5G ProSe layer-3 UE-to-network relay UE or disconnected from the 5G ProSe layer-3 UE-to-network relay UE.

The UE shall allocate a PTI value currently not used and shall set the PTI IE of the REMOTE UE REPORT message to the allocated PTI value.

The UE shall transport the REMOTE UE REPORT message and the PDU session ID, using the NAS transport procedure as specified in subclause5.4.5, and the UE shall start timer T3586 (see example in figure6.6.2.2.1).





Figure6.6.2.2.1: Remote UE report procedure

6.6.2.3 Remote UE report procedure accepted by the network

Upon receipt of the REMOTE UE REPORT message, the SMF shall send a REMOTE UE REPORT RESPONSE message to the UE. The SMF shall include the PTI from the REMOTE UE REPORT message.

The SMF shall set the EAP message IE to an EAP-success message or an EAP-failure message to be sent to the 5G ProSe layer-3 remote UE if the EAP-success message or the EAP-failure message is received from the DN.

The SMF may include the Remote UE handling information IE if the PDU session authentication and authorization procedure for the 5G ProSe layer-3 remote UE were performed.

The SMF may include the Authorized QoS flow description IE to indicate the QoS flow parameters to the 5G ProSe layer-3 relay UE when the PDU session authentication and authorization procedure for the 5G ProSe layer-3 remote UE is successful.

Editors note: Whether and why the Authorized QoS flow description IE is included is FFS.

Upon receipt of the REMOTE UE REPORT RESPONSE message, the UE shall stop timer T3586 and enter the state PROCEDURE TRANSACTION INACTIVE.

Upon receipt of the REMOTE UE REPORT RESPONSE message including the EAP message IE, the UE shall pass the EAP message received in the EAP message IE to the upper layer as defined in 3GPPTS24.554[19E].

Upon receipt of the REMOTE UE REPORT RESPONSE message including the Remote UE handling information IE, the UE shall pass the Remote UE handling information IE to the upper layer as defined in 3GPPTS24.554[19E].

6.6.2.4 Abnormal cases in the UE

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a) Expiry of timer T3586:

 On the first expiry of the timer T3586, the UE shall resend the REMOTE UE REPORT message and shall reset and restart timer T3586. This retransmission is repeated two times, i.e. on the third expiry of timer T3586, the UE shall abort the procedure and release any resources for this procedure.

NOTE: After the abortion of the remote UE report procedure, the remote UE report procedure for the remote UE(s) can be restarted and how to restart the procedure is left to UE implementation.

b) Collision of network-requested PDU session release procedure and remote UE report procedure:

 If the UE receives a PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message during the remote UE report procedure, and the PDU session indicated in the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message is the PDU session ID that the UE had indicated in the REMOTE UE REPORT message, the UE shall abort the remote UE report procedure and proceed with the network-requested PDU session release procedure.

6.6.2.5 Abnormal cases on the network side

The following abnormal cases have been identified:

a) Collision of network-requested PDU session release procedure and remote UE report procedure:

 If the SMF receives a REMOTE UE REPORT message during a network-requested PDU session release procedure, and the PDU session indicated in the PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message is the PDU session ID that is in the REMOTE UE REPORT message, the SMF shall abort the remote UE report procedure and proceed with the network-requested PDU session release procedure.

b) PDU session inactive for the received PDU session identity:

 If the PDU session ID in the REMOTE UE REPORT message belongs to any PDU session in state PDU SESSION INACTIVE in the SMF, the SMF shall send the 5GSM STATUS message to the UE with the 5GSM cause #43 "Invalid PDU session identity".

7 Handling of unknown, unforeseen, and erroneous protocol data

7.1 General

The procedures specified in the present document apply to those messages which pass the checks described in this subclause.

This subclause also specifies procedures for the handling of unknown, unforeseen, and erroneous protocol data by the receiving entity. These procedures are called "error handling procedures", but in addition to providing recovery mechanisms for error situations they define a compatibility mechanism for future extensions of the protocols.

Subclauses7.1 to 7.8 shall be applied in order of precedence.

Detailed error handling procedures in the network are implementation dependent and may vary from PLMN to PLMN. However, when extensions of this protocol are developed, networks are assumed to have the error handling which is indicated in this subclause as mandatory ("shall") and that is indicated as strongly recommended ("should").

Also, the error handling of the network is only considered as mandatory or strongly recommended when certain thresholds for errors are not reached during a dedicated connection.

For definition of semantical and syntactical errors see 3GPPTS24.007[11], subclause11.4.2.

7.2 Message too short or too long

7.2.1 Message too short

When a message is received that is too short to contain a complete message type information element, that message shall be ignored, cf. 3GPPTS24.007[11].

7.2.2 Message too long

The maximum size of a NAS message for NR connected to 5GCN is specified in 3GPPTS38.323[29].

The maximum size of a NAS message for E-UTRA connected to 5GCN is specified 3GPPTS36.323[25].

The maximum size of a NAS message for non-3GPP access connected to 5GCN is specified in 3GPPTS24.502[18]

7.3 Unknown or unforeseen procedure transaction identity or PDU Session identity

7.3.1 Procedure transaction identity

The following network procedures shall apply for handling an unknown, erroneous, or unforeseen PTI received in a 5GSM message:

a) In case the network receives a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMPLETE, a PDU SESSION RELEASE COMPLETE message or a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND REJECT message in which the PTI value is an assigned or unassigned value that does not match any PTI in use, the network shall respond with a 5GSM STATUS message including 5GSM cause #47 "PTI mismatch".

b) In case the network receives a PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMPLETE message in which the PTI value is an assigned value, the network shall respond with a 5GSM STATUS message including 5GSM cause #81 "invalid PTI value".

c) In case the network receives a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message, a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message or a PDU SESSION RELEASE REQUEST message in which the PTI value is an unassigned value, the network shall respond with a 5GSM STATUS message including 5GSM cause #81 "invalid PTI value".

d) In case the network receives a 5GSM message in which the PTI value is a reserved value, the network shall ignore the message.

The following UE procedures shall apply for handling an unknown, erroneous, or unforeseen PTI received in a 5GSM message:

a) In case the UE receives a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message or a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REJECT message in which the PTI value is an assigned value that does not match any PTI in use:

1) if the UE detects that this PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message is a network retransmission of an already accepted request (see subclause6.3.2.3), the UE shall respond with a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMPLETE message;

2) if the UE detects that this PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message is a network retransmission of an already rejected request (see subclause6.3.2.4), the UE shall respond with a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMAND REJECT message; or

3) otherwise, the UE shall respond with a 5GSM STATUS message including 5GSM cause #47 "PTI mismatch".

b) In case the UE receives a PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message or a PDU SESSION RELEASE REJECT message in which the PTI value is an assigned value that does not match any PTI in use:

1) if the UE detects that this PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND message is a network retransmission of an already accepted request (see subclause6.3.3.3), the UE shall respond with a PDU SESSION RELEASE COMPLETE message; or

2) otherwise, the UE shall respond with a 5GSM STATUS message including 5GSM cause #47 "PTI mismatch".

c) In case the UE receives a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message or a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REJECT message in which the PTI value is an assigned value that does not match any PTI in use:

1) the UE shall respond with a 5GSM STATUS message including 5GSM cause #47 "PTI mismatch".

d) In case the UE receives a PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message or a PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION RESULT message in which the PTI value is an assigned value, the UE shall respond with a 5GSM STATUS message including 5GSM cause #81 "invalid PTI value".

e) In case the UE receives a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message, a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REJECT message, a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REJECT message or a PDU SESSION RELEASE REJECT message in which the PTI value is an unassigned value, the UE shall ignore the message.

f) In case the UE receives a 5GSM message in which the PTI value is a reserved value, the UE shall ignore the message.

7.3.2 PDU Session identity

The following network procedures shall apply for handling an unknown, erroneous, or unforeseen PDU session identity received in the header of a 5GSM message (specified as the header of a standard L3 message, see 3GPPTS24.007[11]):

a) If the network receives a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST message which includes an unassigned or reserved PDU session identity value, the network shall respond with a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REJECT message including 5GSM cause #43 "invalid PDU session identity".

b) If the network receives PDU SESSION RELEASE REQUEST message which includes an unassigned or reserved PDU session identity value, the network shall respond with a PDU SESSION RELEASE REJECT message including 5GSM cause #43 "invalid PDU session identity".

c) Upon receipt of an UL NAS TRANSPORT message, the network takes the following actions:

1) If the Request type IE is set to "initial request" or "initial emergency request" and the message includes a reserved PDU session identity value, the network shall respond with a DL NAS TRANSPORT message with 5GMM cause #90 "payload was not forwarded";

2) otherwise, if the message includes an unassigned or reserved PDU session identity value, the network shall respond with a DL NAS TRANSPORT message with 5GMM cause #90 "payload was not forwarded".

d) If the network receives a 5GSM message other than those listed in itemsa) through c) above in which the message includes a reserved PDU session identity value or an assigned value that does not match an existing PDU session, the network shall ignore the message.

The following UE procedures shall apply for handling an unknown, erroneous, or unforeseen PDU session identity received in the header of a 5GSM message:

a) If the UE receives a 5GSM message which includes an unassigned or reserved PDU session identity value, the UE shall ignore the message.

b) If the UE receives a 5GSM message which includes a PDU session identity belonging to any PDU session in state PDU SESSION INACTIVE in the UE, the UE shall respond with a 5GSM STATUS message including 5GSM cause #43 "invalid PDU session identity".

7.4 Unknown or unforeseen message type

If UE receives a 5GMM message or 5GSM message with message type not defined for the extended protocol discriminator (EPD) or not implemented by the receiver, it shall return a status message (5GMM STATUS or 5GSM STATUS depending on the EPD) with cause #97 "message type non-existent or not implemented".

If the network receives a 5GMM or 5GSM message with message type not defined for the EPD or not implemented by the receiver in a protocol state where reception of an unsolicited message with the given EPD from the UE is not foreseen in the protocol, the network actions are implementation dependent. Otherwise, if the network receives a message with message type not defined for the EPD or not implemented by the receiver, it shall ignore the message except that it should return a status message (5GMM STATUS or 5GSM STATUS depending on the EPD) with cause #97 "message type non-existent or not implemented".

NOTE: A message type not defined for the EPD in the given direction is regarded by the receiver as a message type not defined for the EPD, see 3GPPTS24.007[11].

If the UE receives a message not compatible with the protocol state, the UE shall return a status message (5GMM STATUS or 5GSM STATUS depending on the EPD) with cause #98 "message type not compatible with protocol state".

If the network receives a message not compatible with the protocol state, the network actions are implementation dependent.

7.5 Non-semantical mandatory information element errors

7.5.1 Common procedures

When on receipt of a message,

a) an "imperative message part" error; or

b) a "missing mandatory IE" error

is diagnosed or when a message containing:

a) a syntactically incorrect mandatory IE;

b) an IE unknown in the message, but encoded as "comprehension required" (see 3GPPTS24.007[11]); or

c) an out of sequence IE encoded as "comprehension required" (see 3GPPTS24.007[11]) is received,

the UE shall proceed as follows:

 If the message is not one of the messages listed in the UE procedures in subclause7.5.3, item a), b) or c), the UE shall return a status message (5GMM STATUS or 5GSM STATUS depending on the EPD) with cause #96 "invalid mandatory information";

the network shall proceed as follows:

 If the message is not one of the messages listed in the network procedures in subclause7.5.3, item a), b) or c), the network shall either:

1) try to treat the message (the exact further actions are implementation dependent); or

2) ignore the message except that it should return a status message (5GMM STATUS or 5GSM STATUS depending on the EPD) with cause #96 "invalid mandatory information".

7.5.2 5GS mobility management

No exceptional cases are described for 5GS mobility management messages.

No semantical or syntactical diagnosis other than presence and length shall be performed on the EPS NAS message container information element in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

7.5.3 5GS session management

The following UE procedures shall apply for handling an error encountered with a mandatory information element in a 5GSM message:

a) If the message is a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT, the UE shall initiate PDU session release procedure by sending a PDU SESSION RELEASE REQUEST message with 5GSM cause #96 "invalid mandatory information".

b) Void.

c) If the message is a PDU SESSION RELEASE COMMAND, a PDU SESSION RELEASE COMPLETE message with 5GSM cause #96 "invalid mandatory information" shall be returned.

The following network procedures shall apply for handling an error encountered with a mandatory information element in a 5GSM message:

a) If the message is a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST, a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REJECT message with 5GSM cause #96 "invalid mandatory information" shall be returned.

b) If the message is a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST, a PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REJECT message with 5GSM cause #96 "invalid mandatory information" shall be returned.

c) If the message is a PDU SESSION RELEASE REQUEST, a PDU SESSION RELEASE REJECT message with 5GSM cause #96 "invalid mandatory information" shall be returned.

7.6 Unknown and unforeseen IEs in the non-imperative message part

7.6.1 IEIs unknown in the message

The UE shall ignore all IEs unknown in a message which are not encoded as "comprehension required" (see 3GPPTS24.007[11]).

The network shall take the same approach.

7.6.2 Out of sequence IEs

The UE shall ignore all out of sequence IEs in a message which are not encoded as "comprehension required" (see 3GPPTS24.007[11]).

The network should take the same approach.

7.6.3 Repeated IEs

If an information element with format T, TV, TLV, or TLV-E is repeated in a message in which repetition of the information element is not specified in clause8 and clause9 of the present document, the UE shall handle only the contents of the information element appearing first and shall ignore all subsequent repetitions of the information element. When repetition of information elements is specified, the UE shall handle only the contents of specified repeated information elements. If the limit on repetition of information elements is exceeded, the UE shall handle the contents of information elements appearing first up to the limit of repetitions and shall ignore all subsequent repetitions of the information element.

The network should follow the same procedures.

7.7 Non-imperative message part errors

This category includes:

a) syntactically incorrect optional IEs; and

b) conditional IE errors.

7.7.1 Syntactically incorrect optional IEs

The UE shall treat all optional IEs that are syntactically incorrect in a message as not present in the message.

The network shall take the same approach.

7.7.2 Conditional IE errors

When upon receipt of a 5GMM or 5GSM message the UE diagnoses a "missing conditional IE" error or an "unexpected conditional IE" error, or when it receives a 5GMM or 5GSM message containing at least one syntactically incorrect conditional IE, the UE shall ignore the message and shall return a status message (5GMM STATUS or 5GSM STATUS depending on the EPD) with cause #100 "conditional IE error".

When the network receives a message and diagnoses a "missing conditional IE" error or an "unexpected conditional IE" error or when it receives a message containing at least one syntactically incorrect conditional IE, the network shall either:

a) try to treat the message (the exact further actions are implementation dependent); or

b) ignore the message except that it should return a status message (5GMM STATUS or 5GSM STATUS depending on the EPD) with cause #100 "conditional IE error".

7.8 Messages with semantically incorrect contents

When a message with semantically incorrect contents is received, the UE shall perform the foreseen reactions of the procedural part of the present document (i.e. of clauses5, 6). If, however no such reactions are specified, the UE shall ignore the message except that it shall return a status message (5GMM STATUS or 5GSM STATUS depending on the EPD) with cause #95 "semantically incorrect message".

The network should follow the same procedure except that a status message is not normally transmitted.

8.2.4.2 Authentication failure parameter

This IE shall be included in a 5G AKA based primary authentication and key agreement procedure if and only if the 5GMM cause was #21 "synch failure". It shall include the response to the authentication challenge from the USIM, which is made up of the AUTS parameter (see 3GPPTS33.501[24]).

8.2.5 Authentication reject

8.2.5.1 Message definition

The AUTHENTICATION REJECT message is sent by the AMF to the UE to indicate that the authentication procedure has failed and that the UE shall abort all activities. See table8.2.5.1.1.

Message type: AUTHENTICATION REJECT

Significance: dual

Direction: network to UE

8.2.5.2 EAP message

EAP message IE is included if the AUTHENTICATION REJECT message is used to convey EAP-failure message.

8.2.6 Registration request

8.2.6.1 Message definition

The REGISTRATION REQUEST message is sent by the UE to the AMF. See table8.2.6.1.1.

Message type: REGISTRATION REQUEST

Significance: dual

Direction: UE to network


8.2.6.2 Non-current native NAS key set identifier

The UE shall include this IE if the UE has a valid non-current native 5G NAS security context when the UE performs an inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode in 5GMM-CONNECTED mode and the UE uses a mapped 5G NAS security context to protect the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

8.2.6.3 5GMM capability

The UE shall include this IE, unless the UE performs a periodic registration updating procedure.

8.2.6.4 UE security capability

The UE shall include this IE, unless the UE performs a periodic registration updating procedure.

8.2.6.5 Requested NSSAI

This IE shall be included by the UE when performing the registration procedure if the 5GS registration type IE indicates:

a) "initial registration", according to the conditions specified in subclause5.5.1.2.2; or

b) "mobility registration updating", according to the conditions specified in subclause5.5.1.3.2.

8.2.6.6 Last visited registered TAI

This IE shall be included if the UE holds a valid last visited registered TAI.

8.2.6.7 S1 UE network capability

A UE supporting S1 mode shall include this IE, unless the UE performs a periodic registration updating procedure.

8.2.6.8 Uplink data status

This IE shall be included if the UE has uplink user data pending to be sent, unless the UE performs a periodic registration updating procedure.

8.2.6.9 PDU session status

This IE shall be included when the UE needs to indicate the PDU sessions that are associated with the access type that the message is sent over, that are active within the UE.

8.2.6.10 MICO indication

The UE may include this IE to request the use of MICO mode.

8.2.6.11 UE status

This IE shall be included if the UE in single-registration mode performs the registration procedure due to inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode or if the UE in dual-registration mode and EMM state EMM-REGISTERED performs initial registration.

8.2.6.12 Additional GUTI

This IE shall be included:

a)  if the UE performs the registration procedure due to inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode, the UE operates in single-registration mode and the UE has a valid 5G-GUTI; or

b) the UE holds two valid native 5G-GUTIs and one of the valid native 5G-GUTI was assigned by the PLMN with which the UE is performing the registration.

8.2.6.13 Allowed PDU session status

This IE shall be included if the REGISTRATION REQUEST message is sent as a response to paging with the access type indicating non-3GPP access and the UE wants to indicate the user-plane resources of PDU session(s) associated with non-3GPP access allowed to be re-established over 3GPP access.

8.2.6.14 UE's usage setting

This IE shall be included if the UE supports IMS voice.

8.2.6.15 Requested DRX parameters

If the UE wants to use or change the UE specific DRX parameters, the UE shall include the Requested DRX parameters IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

8.2.6.16 EPS NAS message container

The UE operating in the single-registration mode shall include this information element as specified in subclause5.5.1.3.2 if the UE performs mobility from S1 mode to N1 mode in 5GMM-IDLE mode. The content of this message container is the complete integrity protected TRACKING AREA UPATE REQUEST message, using EPS security context.

The UE performing initial registration shall include this information element if

a) the UE:

1) was previously registered in S1 mode before entering state EMM-DEREGISTERED; and

2) has received an "interworking without N26 interface not supported" indication from the network; and

b) EPS security context and a valid 4G-GUTI are available.

The content of this message container is the complete integrity protected ATTACH REQUEST message, using EPS security context.

8.2.6.17 LADN indication

The UE shall include this information element when the UE needs to request LADN information for specific LADN DNN(s) or to indicate a request for LADN information.

8.2.6.17A Payload container type

This IE shall be included if the UE includes the Payload container IE.

NOTE: In this version of the protocol, the Payload container type IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message is set to "UE policy container" as described in subclauses5.5.1.2.2 and 5.5.1.3.2.

8.2.6.18 Payload container

Within a PLMN, this IE shall be included if the UE has one or more stored UE policy sections identified by a UPSI with the PLMN ID part indicating the HPLMN or the selected PLMN for the registration procedure for mobility and periodic registration update due to inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode of a UE operating in the single-registration mode or for the registration procedure for initial registration.

Within an SNPN, this IE shall be included if the UE has one or more stored UE policy sections for the selected SNPN for the registration procedure for initial registration.

8.2.6.19 Network slicing indication

This IE shall be included when a requested NSSAI is included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and the requested NSSAI is created from the default configured NSSAI.

8.2.6.20 5GS update type

This IE shall be included when the UE is performing the registration procedure to indicate any of the following:

a) the UE requests the use of SMS over NAS or there is a change in the UE's requirements to use SMS over NAS;

b) a change in the UE's radio capability for NG-RAN; or

c) the UE requests CIoT 5GS optimizations.

8.2.6.21 NAS message container

This IE shall be included if the UE is sending a REGISTRATION REQUEST message as an initial NAS message, the UE has a valid 5G NAS security context and the UE needs to send non-cleartext IEs.

8.2.6.22 Requested extended DRX parameters

The UE shall include this IE if the UE needs to use extended DRX or change the extended DRX parameters.

8.2.6.23 EPS bearer context status

The UE shall include this IE if the UE operating in the single-registration mode performs inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode and the UE has locally deactivated EPS bearer context(s) for which interworking to 5GS is supported while the UE was in S1 mode without notifying the network.

8.2.6.24 T3324 value

The UE may include this IE during the registration update procedure if it requests to use MICO mode and use the active time timer.

8.2.6.25 Mobile station classmark 2

This IE shall be included if the UE supports 5G-SRVCC from NG-RAN to UTRAN (see 3GPPTS23.216[6A]).

8.2.6.26 Supported codecs

This IE shall be included if the UE supports 5G-SRVCC from NG-RAN to UTRAN.

8.2.6.27 UE radio capability ID

This IE shall be included if the UE is not in NB-N1 mode, the UE supports RACS and the UE needs to signal a UE radio capability ID to the network.

8.2.6.28 Requested mapped NSSAI

This IE shall be included by the UE when the UE has a PDN connection or a PDU session to transfer to visited PLMN associated only with an S-NSSAI that is applicable in the HPLMN as specified in clause5.5.1.3.2.

8.2.6.29 Additional information requested

The UE shall include this IE if the UE supports ciphered broadcast assistance data and the UE needs to obtain new ciphering keys for ciphered broadcast assistance data.

8.2.6.30 Requested WUS assistance information

The UE may include this IE if:

- the UE supports WUS assistance information;

- the UE is not performing initial registration for emergency services; and

- the UE does not have an active emergency PDU session.

8.2.6.31 Void

8.2.6.32 N5GC indication

This IE shall be included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message when the W-AGF is acting on behalf of an N5GC device.

8.2.6.33 Requested NB-N1 mode DRX parameters

The UE shall include this IE if the UE wants to use or change the UE specific DRX parameters for NB-N1 mode.

8.2.6.34 UE request type

The UE shall include this IE if the MUSIM UE requests the release of the NAS signalling connection.

8.2.6.35 Paging restriction

The UE shall include this IE if the Request type is set to "NAS signalling connection release" in the UE request type IE and the UE requests the network to restrict paging.

8.2.6.35 Service-level-AA container

The UE shall include this IE if the UE supporting UAS services requests a registration for UAS services.

8.2.6.36 NID

The UE shall include this IE if the 5G-GUTI in the 5GS mobile identity IE was assigned by an SNPN other than the SNPN with which the UE is registering.

8.2.6.37 MS determined PLMN with disaster condition

The UE shall include this IE when the UE needs to indicate the MS determined PLMN with disaster condition determined as specified in 3GPPTS23.122[5].

8.2.6.38 Requested PEIPS assistance information

The UE may include this IE if the UE supports NR paging subgrouping, the UE is not performing initial registration for emergency services, is not registered for emergency services and does not have an active emergency PDU session.

8.2.7 Registration accept

8.2.7.1 Message definition

The REGISTRATION ACCEPT message is sent by the AMF to the UE. See table8.2.7.1.1.

Message type: REGISTRATION ACCEPT

Significance: dual

Direction: network to UE


8.2.7.2 5G-GUTI

This IE may be included to assign a 5G-GUTI to a UE.

8.2.7.3 Equivalent PLMNs

This IE may be included in order to assign a new equivalent PLMNs list to a UE.

8.2.7.4 TAI list

This IE may be included to assign a TAI list to a UE.

8.2.7.5 Allowed NSSAI

This IE shall be included:

a) if:

1) one or more S-NSSAIs in the requested NSSAI of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message are allowed by the AMF for a network not supporting NSSAA;

2) one or more S-NSSAIs in the requested NSSAI of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message are not subject to network slice-specific authentication and authorization and are allowed by the AMF; or

3) the network slice-specific authentication and authorization has been successfully performed for one or more S-NSSAIs in the requested NSSAI of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message; or

b) if the initial registration request is not for onboarding services in SNPN or the UE is not registered for onboarding services in SNPN, the requested NSSAI was not included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message or none of the requested NSSAI are allowed; and

1) the network not supporting NSSAA has one or more default S-NSSAIs; or

2) the network has one or more default S-NSSAIs which are not subject to network slice-specific authentication and authorization.

8.2.7.6 Rejected NSSAI

The network may include this IE to inform the UE of one or more S-NSSAIs that were included in the requested NSSAI in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message but were rejected by the network.

8.2.7.7 Configured NSSAI

The network may include this IE if the network needs to provide the UE with a new configured NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN and the UE is neither registering nor registered for onboarding services in SNPN.

8.2.7.8 5GS network feature support

The network may include this IE to inform the UE of the support of certain features. If this IE is not included then the UE shall interpret this as a receipt of an information element with all bits of the value part coded as zero.

8.2.7.9 PDU session status

This IE shall be included when the network needs to indicate the PDU sessions that are associated with the access type the message is sent over, that are active in the network.

8.2.7.10 PDU session reactivation result

This IE shall be included:

- if the Uplink data status IE is included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message;

- if the Allowed PDU session status IE is included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message and there is at least one PDU session indicated in the Allowed PDU session status IE for which the user-plane resources can be re-established over 3GPP access.

8.2.7.11 PDU session reactivation result error cause

This IE may be included, if the PDU session reactivation result IE is included and there exist one or more PDU sessions for which the user-plane resources cannot be re-established, to indicate the cause of failure to re-establish the user-plane resources.

8.2.7.12 LADN information

The network shall include this IE if there are valid LADN service area(s) for the subscribed DNN(s) of the UE in the current registration area.

8.2.7.13 MICO indication

The network shall include the MICO indication IE if:

a)- the UE included the MICO indication IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message; and

b) the network supports and accepts the use of MICO mode.

8.2.7.14 Network slicing indication

This IE shall be included if the user's network slicing subscription has changed in the UDM of a PLMN or an SNPN.

8.2.7.15 Service area list

This IE may be included to assign new service area restrictions to the UE.

8.2.7.16 T3512 value

The AMF shall include this IE during a registration procedure over 3GPP access when the 5GS registration type IE does not indicate "periodic registration updating". The AMF may include this IE during the mobility and periodic registration update procedure over 3GPP access when the 5GS registration type IE indicates "periodic registration updating".

8.2.7.17 Non-3GPP de-registration timer value

This IE may be included if the network needs to indicate to the UE registered over non-3GPP access the value of a non-3GPP de-registration timer value.

8.2.7.18 T3502 value

This IE may be included to indicate a value for timer T3502.

8.2.7.19 Emergency number list

This IE may be sent by the network. If this IE is sent, the contents of this IE indicates a list of emergency numbers valid within the same country as in the PLMN from which this IE is received.

8.2.7.20 Extended emergency number list

This IE may be sent by the network. If this IE is sent, the contents of this IE indicates a list of emergency numbers (with URN information) valid within the same country as in the PLMN from which this IE is received or valid only in the PLMN or SNPN from which this IE is received.

8.2.7.21 SOR transparent container

This IE may be sent by the network.

8.2.7.22 EAP message

EAP message IE is included if the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message is sent as part of registration for emergency services and is used to convey EAP-failure message.

8.2.7.23 NSSAI inclusion mode

This IE shall be included if required by operatory policy.

8.2.7.24 Operator-defined access category definitions

This IE may be included to assign new operator-defined access category definitions to the UE or delete the operator-defined access category definitions at the UE side.

8.2.7.25 Negotiated DRX parameters

The network shall include this IE if the Requested DRX parameters IE was included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

8.2.7.26 Non-3GPP NW policies

The AMF shall not include this IE during a registration procedure over non-3GPP access.

This IE is included if the network needs to indicate whether emergency numbers provided via non-3GPP access can be used to initiate UE detected emergency calls (see 3GPPTS24.302[16]). If this IE is not included then the UE shall interpret this as a receipt of an information element with all bits of the value part coded as zero.

NOTE: In this version of the specification, this IE is applicable in case the UE is connected to a PLMN using an ePDG as specified in 3GPPTS24.302[16].

8.2.7.27 Negotiated extended DRX parameters

The network shall include the Negotiated extended DRX parameters IE if:

- the UE included the Requested extended DRX parameters IE in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message; and

- the network supports eDRX and accepts the use of eDRX.

8.2.7.28 T3447 value

The network may include T3447 value IE if:

- the UE has indicated support for service gap control in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message; and

- the 5GMM context contains a service gap time value.

8.2.7.29 T3448 value

The network may include this IE if the congestion control for transport of user data via the control plane is active and the UE supports the control plane CIoT 5GS optimizations.

8.2.7.30 T3324 value

The AMF shall include this IE if the UE has requested active time value in the REGISTRATION REQEUST message and the AMF decides to accept the use of MICO mode and the use of the active time.

8.2.7.31 EPS bearer context status

This IE shall be included when the network generated an EPS bearer context status information for the UE during the inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode and the network supports N26 interface.

8.2.7.32 UE radio capability ID

This IE may be included if the UE is not in NB-N1 mode, both the UE and the network support RACS and the network needs to assign a network-assigned UE radio capability ID to the UE.

8.2.7.33 UE radio capability ID deletion indication

This IE may be included if the UE is not in NB-N1 mode, both the UE and the network support RACS and the network needs to trigger the UE to delete all network-assigned UE radio capability IDs stored at the UE for the serving PLMN or SNPN.

8.2.7.34 Pending NSSAI

The network may include this IE to inform the UE of one or more S-NSSAIs that are pending as the network slice-specific authentication and authorization procedure is not completed.

8.2.7.35 Ciphering key data

This IE is included if the network needs to send ciphering key data to the UE for ciphered broadcast assistance data.

8.2.7.36 CAG information list

This IE may be included to assign a new "CAG information list" to the UE or delete the "CAG information list" at the UE side.

8.2.7.37 Truncated 5G-S-TMSI configuration

The network shall include this IE if:

- the UE is in NB-N1 mode;

- the UE requests "control plane CIoT 5GS optimization" in the 5GS update type IE of REGISTRATION REQUEST message;

- the AMF decides to accept the requested CIoT 5GS optimization; and

- the network is configured to provide the truncated 5G-S-TMSI configuration for control plane CIoT 5GS optimizations.

8.2.7.38 Negotiated NB-N1 mode DRX parameters

The network shall include the Negotiated NB-N1 mode DRX parameters IE if the requested NB-N1 mode DRX parameters IE was included in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message.

8.2.7.39 Negotiated WUS assistance information

The network shall include the Negotiated WUS assistance information IE if:

- the UE supports WUS assistance information;

- the AMF supports and accepts the use of WUS assistance information;

- the UE is not performing the initial registration for emergency services; and

- the UE does not have an active emergency PDU session.

8.2.7.40 Extended rejected NSSAI

If the UE supports Extended rejected NSSAI, the network may include this IE to inform the UE of one or more S-NSSAIs that were included in the requested NSSAI in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message but were rejected by the network.

8.2.7.41 Service-level-AA container

The network shall include this IE if the UUAA procedure is triggered for the UE supporting UAS services. The network may include this IE if there is a valid successful UUAA result for the UE in the UE 5GMM context upon a registration for UAS services is requested from the UE.

8.2.7.42 Negotiated PEIPS assistance information

The network shall include the Negotiated PEIPS assistance information IE if:

- the UE supports NR paging subgrouping;

- the AMF supports and accepts the use of PEIPS assistance information for the UE; and

- the UE is not performing initial registration for emergency services and does not have an active emergency PDU session.

8.2.7.43 5GS additional request result

The network may include this IE to inform the UE about the result of additional request.

8.2.7.44 NSSRG information

This IE may be included to provide NSSRG information associated with the configured NSSAI only if the configured NSSAI IE is included.

8.2.7.45 Disaster roaming wait range

This IE may be included to assign a new disaster roaming wait range to the UE.

8.2.7.46 Disaster return wait range

This IE may be included to assign a new disaster return wait range to the UE.

8.2.7.47 List of PLMNs to be used in disaster condition

This IE may be included by an allowed PLMN to assign a new "list of PLMN(s) to be used in disaster condition" associated with the serving PLMN to the UE.

8.2.7.48 Forbidden TAI(s) for the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming"

This IE is included to indicate the forbidden TAI(s) to be stored in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming". This IE is included only if the message is sent via satellite NG-RAN access. 

8.2.7.49 Forbidden TAI(s) for the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas forregional provision of service"

This IE is included to indicate the forbidden TAI(s) to be stored in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service". This IE is included only if the message is sent via satellite NG-RAN access.

8.2.7.50 Extended CAG information list

If the UE supports Extended CAG information list, the network may include this IE to assign a new "CAG information list" to the UE or delete the "CAG information list" at the UE side.

8.2.7.51 NSAG information

If the UE has set the NSAG bit to "NSAG supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, the network may include this IE to provide NSAG information to the UE.

8.2.8 Registration complete

8.2.8.1 Message definition

The REGISTRATION COMPLETE message is sent by the UE to the AMF. See table8.2.8.1.1.

Message type: REGISTRATION COMPLETE

Significance: dual

Direction: UE to network

8.2.8.2 SOR transparent container

This IE may be sent by the UE. If this IE is sent, the contents of this IE indicates the UE acknowledgement of successful reception of the SOR transparent container IE in the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message. This IE shall indicate the ME support of SOR-CMCI.

8.2.9 Registration reject

8.2.9.1 Message definition

The REGISTRATION REJECT message is sent by the AMF to the UE. See table8.2.9.1.1.

Message type: REGISTRATION REJECT

Significance: dual

Direction: network to UE


8.2.9.2 T3346 value

The AMF may include this IE when the general NAS level mobility management congestion control is active

8.2.9.3 T3502 value

This IE may be included to indicate a value for timer T3502 during the initial registration.

8.2.9.4 EAP message

EAP message IE is included if the REGISTRATION REJECT message is used to convey EAP-failure message.

8.2.9.5 Rejected NSSAI

The network may include this IE to inform the UE of one or more S-NSSAIs that were included in the requested NSSAI in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message but were rejected by the network.

8.2.9.6 CAG information list

This IE may be included to assign a new "CAG information list" to the UE or delete the "CAG information list" at the UE side.

8.2.9.7 Extended rejected NSSAI

If the UE supports Extended rejected NSSAI, the network may include this IE to inform the UE of one or more S-NSSAIs that were included in the requested NSSAI in the REGISTRATION REQUEST message but were rejected by the network.

8.2.9.8 Disaster return wait range

This IE may be included to assign a new disaster return wait range to the UE.

8.2.9.9 Extended CAG information list

If the UE supports Extended CAG information list, the network may include this IE to assign a new "CAG information list" to the UE or delete the "CAG information list" at the UE side.

8.2.9.10 Lower bound timer value

The AMF may include this IE when the 5GMM cause is set to #78 "PLMN not allowed to operate at the present UE location", to provide a minimum time value for an entry added to the list of "PLMNs not allowed to operate at the present UE location".

8.2.9.11 Forbidden TAI(s) for the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming"

This IE is included to indicate the forbidden TAI(s) to be stored in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming". This IE is included only if the message is sent via satellite NG-RAN access. 

8.2.9.12 Forbidden TAI(s) for the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas forregional provision of service"

This IE is included to indicate the forbidden TAI(s) to be stored in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service". This IE is included only if the message is sent via satellite NG-RAN access.

8.2.10 UL NAS transport

8.2.10.1 Message definition

The UL NAS TRANSPORT message transports message payload and associated information to the AMF. See table8.2.10.1.1.

Message type: UL NAS TRANSPORT

Significance: dual

Direction: UE to network

8.2.10.2 PDU session ID

The UE shall include this IE when the Payload container type IE is set to "N1 SM information" or "CIoT user data.

8.2.10.3 Old PDU session ID

The UE shall include this IE if the UL NAS TRANSPORT message transports a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message upon receiving the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION COMMAND message with the 5GSM cause IE set to #39 "reactivation requested" and the Payload container type IE is set to "N1 SM information".

8.2.10.4 Request type

The UE shall include this IE when the PDU session ID IE is included and the Payload container IE contains the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message or the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST which is not initiated to indicate a change of 3GPP PS data off UE status associated to a PDU session.

8.2.10.5 S-NSSAI

The UE may include this IE when the Request type IE is set to "initial request", "existing PDU session" or "MA PDU request", the Payload container type IE is set to "N1 SM information" and the UE is not registered for onboarding services in SNPN.

8.2.10.6 DNN

The UE may include this IE when the Request type IE is set to "initial request", "existing PDU session" or "MA PDU request", the Payload container type IE is set to "N1 SM information" and the UE is not registered for onboarding services in SNPN.

8.2.10.7 Additional information

The UE may include this IE when the Payload container type IE is set to "LTE Positioning Protocol (LPP) message container" or "Location services (LCS) message container".

8.2.10.8 MA PDU session information

The UE may include this IE if the Request type IE is included and is not set to "initial emergency request " or "existing emergency PDU session" in the UL NAS TRANSPORT message.

8.2.10.9 Release assistance indication

The UE may include this IE to inform the network whether:

- no further uplink and no further downlink data transmission is expected; or

- only a single downlink data transmission (e.g. acknowledgement or response to uplink data) and no further uplink data transmission subsequent to the uplink data transmission is expected.

8.2.11 DL NAS transport

8.2.11.1 Message definition

The DL NAS TRANSPORT message transports message payload and associated information to the UE. See table8.2.11.1.1.

Message type: DL NAS TRANSPORT

Significance: dual

Direction: network to UE


8.2.11.2 PDU session ID

The AMF shall include this IE when the Payload container type IE is set to "N1 SM information" or "CIoT user data container".

8.2.11.3 Additional information

The AMF may include this IE when the Payload container type IE is set to "LTE Positioning Protocol (LPP) message container" or "Location services (LCS) message container".

8.2.11.4 5GMM cause

The AMF shall include this IE when the Payload container IE contains an uplink payload which was not forwarded and the Payload container type IE is not set to "Multiple payloads".

8.2.11.5 Back-off timer value

The AMF shall include this IE when the Payload container IE contains an uplink 5GSM message which was not forwarded due to DNN based congestion control, S-NSSAI and DNN based congestion control, S-NSSAI only based congestion control or the DNN is not supported or not subscribed in a slice, and the Payload container type IE is not set to "Multiple payloads".

8.2.11.6 Lower bound timer value

The AMF may include this IE when the 5GMM cause is set to #78 "PLMN not allowed to operate at the present UE location", to provide a minimum time value for an entry added to the list of "PLMNs not allowed to operate at the present UE location".

8.2.12 De-registration request (UE originating de-registration)

8.2.12.1 Message definition

The DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message is sent by the UE to the AMF. See table8.2.12.1.1.

Message type: DEREGISTRATION REQUEST

Significance: dual

Direction: UE to network


8.2.14.2 5GMM cause

This information element is included if a 5GMM cause is provided.

8.2.14.3 T3346 value

The AMF may include this IE when the general NAS level mobility management congestion control is active.

8.2.14.4 Rejected NSSAI

The AMF may include this IE to inform the UE of one or more S-NSSAIs that were rejected by the network due to network slice-specific authentication and authorization failure or revocation as specified in subclause4.6.2.4.

8.2.14.5 CAG information list

This IE may be included to assign a new "CAG information list" to the UE or delete the "CAG information list" at the UE side.

8.2.14.6 Extended rejected NSSAI

If the UE supports Extended rejected NSSAI, the AMF may include this IE to inform the UE of one or more S-NSSAIs that were rejected by the network due to network slice-specific authentication and authorization failure or revocation as specified in subclause4.6.2.4.

8.2.14.7 Disaster return wait range

This IE may be included to assign a new disaster return wait range to the UE.

8.2.14.8 Lower bound timer value

The AMF may include this IE when the 5GMM cause is set to #78 "PLMN not allowed to operate at the present UE location", to provide a minimum time value for an entry added to the list of "PLMNs not allowed to operate at the present UE location".

8.2.14.9 Forbidden TAI(s) for the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming"

This IE is included to indicate the forbidden TAI(s) to be stored in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming". This IE is included only if the message is sent via satellite NG-RAN access. 

8.2.14.10 Forbidden TAI(s) for the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas forregional provision of service"

This IE is included to indicate the forbidden TAI(s) to be stored in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service". This IE is included only if the message is sent via satellite NG-RAN access.

8.2.15 De-registration accept (UE terminated de-registration)

8.2.15.1 Message definition

The DEREGISTRATION ACCEPT message is sent by the UE to the AMF. See table8.2.15.1.1.

Message type: DEREGISTRATION ACCEPT

Significance: dual

Direction: UE to network


8.2.16.2 Uplink data status

This IE shall be included if the UE has uplink user data pending to be sent.

8.2.16.3 PDU session status

This IE shall be included when the UE needs to indicate the PDU sessions that are associated with the access type that the message is sent over, that are active within the UE.

8.2.16.4 Allowed PDU session status

This IE shall be included if the SERVICE REQUEST message is sent as a response to paging or notification via 3GPP access for PDU session(s) associated with non-3GPP access and the UE needs to indicate the user-plane resources of PDU session(s) associated with non-3GPP access allowed to be re-established over 3GPP access or if there is no PDU session(s) for which the UE allows the user-plane resources to be re-established over 3GPP access.

8.2.16.5 NAS message container

This IE shall be included if the UE is sending a SERVICE REQUEST message as an initial NAS message and the UE needs to send non-cleartext IEs.

8.2.16.6 UE request type

The UE shall include this IE if the MUSIM UE requests the release of the NAS signalling connection or rejects the paging request from the network.

8.2.16.7 Paging restriction

The UE shall include this IE if the Request type is set to "NAS signalling connection release" or to "Rejection of paging" in the UE request type IE and the UE requests the network to restrict paging.

8.2.17 Service accept

8.2.17.1 Message definition

The SERVICE ACCEPT message is sent by the AMF to the UE in order to accept the service request procedure. See table8.2.17.1.1.

Message type: SERVICE ACCEPT

Significance: dual

Direction: network to UE

8.2.17.2 PDU session status

This IE shall be included when the network needs to indicate the PDU sessions that are associated with the access type that the message is sent over that are active within the network.

8.2.17.3 PDU session reactivation result

This IE shall be included:

- if the Uplink data status IE is included in the SERVICE REQUEST message;

- if the Allowed PDU session status IE is included in the SERVICE REQUEST message and there is at least one PDU session indicated in the Allowed PDU session status IE for which user-plane resources can be re-established over 3GPP access.

8.2.17.4 PDU session reactivation result error cause

This IE may be included if the PDU session reactivation result IE is included and there exist one or more PDU sessions for which the user-plane resources cannot be re-established, to indicate the cause of failure to re-establish the user-plane resources.

8.2.17.5 EAP message

EAP message IE is included if the SERVICE ACCEPT message is sent to a UE registered for emergency services and is used to convey EAP-failure message.

8.2.17.6 T3448 value

The network may include this IE if the congestion control for transport of user data via the control plane is active and the UE supports the control plane CIoT 5GS optimizations.

8.2.17.7 5GS additional request result

The network may include this IE to inform the UE about the result of additional request.

8.2.17.8 Forbidden TAI(s) for the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming"

This IE is included to indicate the forbidden TAI(s) to be stored in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming". This IE is included only if the message is sent via satellite NG-RAN access. 

8.2.17.9 Forbidden TAI(s) for the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas forregional provision of service"

This IE is included to indicate the forbidden TAI(s) to be stored in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service". This IE is included only if the message is sent via satellite NG-RAN access.

8.2.18 Service reject

8.2.18.1 Message definition

The SERVICE REJECT message is sent by the AMF to the UE in order to reject the service request procedure. See table8.2.18.1.1.

Message type: SERVICE REJECT

Significance: dual

Direction: network to UE


8.2.18.2 PDU session status

This IE shall be included when the network needs to indicate the PDU sessions that are associated with the access type that the message is sent over, that are active within the network.

8.2.18.3 T3346 value

The AMF may include this IE when the general NAS level mobility management congestion control is active.

8.2.18.4 EAP message

EAP message IE is included if the SERVICE REJECT message is used to convey EAP-failure message.

8.2.18.5 T3448 value

The network may include this IE if the congestion control for transport of user data via the control plane is active and the UE supports the control plane CIoT 5GS optimizations.

8.2.18.6 CAG information list

This IE may be included to assign a new "CAG information list" to the UE or delete the "CAG information list" at the UE side.

8.2.18.7 Disaster return wait range

This IE may be included to assign a new disaster return wait range to the UE.

8.2.18.8 Extended CAG information list

If the UE supports Extended CAG information list, the network may include this IE to assign a new "CAG information list" to the UE or delete the "CAG information list" at the UE side.

8.2.18.9 Lower bound timer value

The AMF may include this IE when the 5GMM cause is set to #78 "PLMN not allowed to operate at the present UE location", to provide a minimum time value for an entry added to the list of "PLMNs not allowed to operate at the present UE location".

8.2.18.10 Forbidden TAI(s) for the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming"

This IE is included to indicate the forbidden TAI(s) to be stored in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for roaming". This IE is included only if the message is sent via satellite NG-RAN access. 

8.2.18.11 Forbidden TAI(s) for the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas forregional provision of service"

This IE is included to indicate the forbidden TAI(s) to be stored in the list of "5GS forbidden tracking areas for regional provision of service". This IE is included only if the message is sent via satellite NG-RAN access.

8.2.19 Configuration update command

8.2.19.1 Message definition

The CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND message is sent by the AMF to the UE. See table8.2.19.1.1.

Message type: CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMMAND

Significance: dual

Direction: network to UE


8.2.19.2 Configuration update indication

The AMF shall include this IE if the AMF needs to request an acknowledgement or a registration procedure from the UE.

8.2.19.3 5G-GUTI

This IE may be included to assign a new 5G GUTI to the UE.

8.2.19.4 TAI list

This IE may be included to assign a new TAI list to the UE.

8.2.19.5 Allowed NSSAI

This IE may be included to assign a new allowed NSSAI to the UE not registered for onboarding services in SNPN.

8.2.19.6 Service area list

This IE may be included to assign a new service area list to the UE.

8.2.19.7 Full name for network

This IE may be included to assign a new full name for network to the UE.

8.2.19.8 Short name for network

This IE may be included to assign a new short name for network to the UE.

8.2.19.9 Local time zone

This IE may be included to assign a new local time zone to the UE.

8.2.19.10 Universal time and local time zone

This IE may be included to assign new universal time and local time zone to the UE.

8.2.19.11 Network daylight saving time

This IE may be included to assign new network daylight saving time to the UE.

8.2.19.12 LADN information

This IE may be included to assign new LADN information to the UE or delete the LADN information at the UE side.

8.2.19.13 MICO indication

This IE may be included to request the UE to re-negotiate MICO mode.

8.2.19.14 Network slicing indication

This IE shall be included if the user's network slicing subscription has changed in the UDM of a PLMN or an SNPN.

8.2.19.15 Configured NSSAI

The AMF shall include this IE when the AMF needs to provide the UE with a new configured NSSAI for the current PLMN or SNPN and the UE is neither registering nor registered for onboarding services in SNPN.

8.2.19.16 Rejected NSSAI

The network may include this IE to inform the UE of one or more S-NSSAIs that were previously sent to the UE in the allowed NSSAI or the pending NSSAI, but are now considered rejected by the network.

8.2.19.17 Operator-defined access category definitions

This IE may be included to assign new operator-defined access category definitions to the UE or delete the operator-defined access category definitions at the UE side.

8.2.19.18 SMS indication

This IE may be included to indicate that the ability for the UE to use SMS over NAS has changed.

8.2.19.19 T3447 value

This IE may be included to assign a new T3447 value to the UE.

8.2.19.20 CAG information list

This IE may be included to assign new "CAG information list" to the UE or delete the "CAG information list" at the UE side.

8.2.19.21 UE radio capability ID

This IE may be included if the UE is not in NB-N1 mode, both the UE and the network support RACS and the network needs to assign a network-assigned UE radio capability ID to the UE.

8.2.19.22 UE radio capability ID deletion indication

This IE may be included if the UE is not in NB-N1 mode, both the UE and the network support RACS and the network needs to trigger the UE to delete all network-assigned UE radio capability IDs stored at the UE for the serving PLMN or serving SNPN.

8.2.19.23 5GS registration result

This IE shall be included if the network wants to indicate to the UE that the UE is registered for emergency services.

8.2.19.24 Truncated 5G-S-TMSI configuration

This IE may be included to provide a new truncated 5G-S-TMSI configuration to the UE in NB-N1 mode if the network is configured to provide the truncated 5G-S-TMSI configuration for control plane CIoT 5GS optimizations.

8.2.19.25 Additional configuration indication

The network may include this IE when requesting the UE to register without the release of the N1 NAS signalling connection.

8.2.19.26 Extended rejected NSSAI

If the UE supports Extended rejected NSSAI, the network may include this IE to inform the UE of one or more S-NSSAIs that were previously sent to the UE in the allowed NSSAI or the pending NSSAI, but are now considered rejected by the network.

8.2.19.27 Service-level-AA container

The network shall include this IE when the AMF receives the Service-level-AA payload or the UUAA-MM result from the UAS-NF during the UUAA-MM procedure or the UUAA revocation procedure. The network shall also include this IE if the AMF receives from the UAS-AF, the CAA-Level UAV ID as part of the UUAA-MM procedure.

8.2.19.28 NSSRG information

This IE may be included to provide NSSRG information associated with the configured NSSAI only if the configured NSSAI IE is included.

8.2.19.29 Disaster roaming wait range

This IE may be included to assign a new disaster roaming wait range to the UE.

8.2.19.30 Disaster return wait range

This IE may be included to assign a new disaster return wait range to the UE.

8.2.19.31 List of PLMNs to be used in disaster condition

This IE may be included by an allowed PLMN to assign a new "list of PLMN(s) to be used in disaster condition" associated with the serving PLMN to the UE.

8.2.19.32 Extended CAG information list

If the UE supports Extended CAG information list, the network may include this IE to assign a new "CAG information list" to the UE or delete the "CAG information list" at the UE side.

8.2.19.33 Updated PEIPS assistance information

The AMF may include this IE if the UE supports NR paging subgrouping, the AMF supports and accepts the use of PEIPIS assistance information for the UE, the UE is not registered for emergency services, the UE does not have an active emergency PDU session, and the network needs to update PEIPS assistance information for the UE.

8.2.19.34 NSAG information

If the UE has set the NSAG bit to "NSAG supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message, the network may include this IE to provide NSAG information to the UE.

8.2.20 Configuration update complete

8.2.20.1 Message definition

The CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMPLETE message is sent by the UE to the AMF. See table8.2.20.1.1.

Message type: CONFIGURATION UPDATE COMPLETE

Significance: dual

Direction: UE to network


8.3.1.2 PDU session type

This IE shall be included in the message when the UE requests to establish a new PDU session.

8.3.1.3 SSC mode

This IE is included in the message when the UE requests to establish a new PDU session with a DN and requests an SSC mode.

8.3.1.4 Maximum number of supported packet filters

This IE shall be included in the message when the selected PDU session type is "IPv4", "IPv6", "IPv4v6" or "Ethernet" and the UE can support more than 16 packet filters for this PDU session.

8.3.1.5 5GSM capability

This IE is included in the message when the UE requests to establish a new PDU session or to transfer an existing PDN connection and any of the 5GSM capabilities supported by the UE is relevant for the PDU session.

8.3.1.6 Void

8.3.1.7 Always-on PDU session requested

The UE shall include this IE if the UE requests to establish a PDU session as an always-on PDU session.

8.3.1.8 SM PDU DN request container

This IE is included in the message when the UE requests to establish a new PDU session with a DN and needs to provide information for the PDU session authentication and authorization by the external DN.

8.3.1.9 Extended protocol configuration options

This IE is included in the message when the UE needs to transmit (protocol) data (e.g. configuration parameters, error codes or messages/events) to the network.

8.3.1.10 IP header compression configuration

The UE shall include the IP header compression configuration IE if:

- the PDU session type value of the PDU session type IE is set to "IPv4", "IPv6" or "IPv4v6";

- the UE indicates "Control Plane CIoT 5GS optimization supported" and "IP header compression for control plane CIoT 5GS optimization supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message; and

- the network indicates "Control plane CIoT 5GS optimization supported" and "IP header compression for control plane CIoT 5GS optimization supported" in the 5GS network support feature IE of the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

8.3.1.11 DS-TT Ethernet port MAC address

This IE shall be included in the message if the UE supports transfer of port management information containers and the UE requests to establish a new PDU session of "Ethernet" PDU session type.

8.3.1.12 UE-DS-TT residence time

This IE shall be included in the message if:

a) the UE supports transfer of port management information containers; and

b) the UE-DS-TT residence time is available at the UE.

8.3.1.13 Port management information container

This IE shall be included in the message if the UE supports transfer of port management information containers.

8.3.1.14 Ethernet header compression configuration

The UE shall include the Ethernet header compression configuration IE if:

- the PDU session type value of the PDU session type IE is set to "Ethernet";

- the UE indicated "Control Plane CIoT 5GS optimization supported" and "Ethernet header compression for control plane CIoT 5GS optimization supported" in the 5GMM capability IE of the REGISTRATION REQUEST message; and

- the network indicated "Control plane CIoT 5GS optimization supported" and "Ethernet header compression for control plane CIoT 5GS optimization supported" in the 5GS network support feature IE of the REGISTRATION ACCEPT message.

8.3.1.15 Suggested interface identifier

This IE may be included by the W-AGF acting on behalf of the FN-RG.

8.3.1.16 Service-level-AA container

This IE shall be included in the message when the UE needs to establish a PDU session for the UAS services.

8.3.1.17 Requested MBS container

This IE is included in the message when the UE requests to join one or more MBS sessions that are associated with the PDU session.

8.3.1.18 PDU session pair ID

This IE shall be included in the message when the UE needs to include a PDU session pair ID.

8.3.1.19 RSN

This IE shall be included in the message when the UE needs to include an RSN.

8.3.2 PDU session establishment accept

8.3.2.1 Message definition

The PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT message is sent by the SMF to the UE in response to PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message and indicates successful establishment of a PDU session. See table8.3.2.1.1.

Message type: PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT ACCEPT

Significance: dual

Direction: network to UE


8.3.2.2 5GSM cause

This IE is included when the selected PDU session type is different from the PDU session type requested by the UE.

8.3.2.3 PDU address

This IE is included when the selected PDU session type is "IPv4", "IPv6" or "IPv4v6".

8.3.2.4 RQ timer value

This IE is included when the network needs to provide the RQ timer value.

8.3.2.5 S-NSSAI

This IE shall be included in the message when the SMF received from the AMF an S-NSSAI together with the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message, the PDU session is a non-emergency PDU session and the UE is not registered for onboarding services in SNPN.

8.3.2.6 Always-on PDU session indication

The network shall include this IE if the network decides to inform the UE whether the PDU session is established as an always-on PDU session.

8.3.2.7 Mapped EPS bearer contexts

This IE is included when interworking with EPS is supported for the PDU session.

8.3.2.8 EAP message

This IE is included when the external DN successfully performed authentication and authorization of the UE using EAP.

8.3.2.9 Authorized QoS flow descriptions

This IE is included when the network needs to provide authorized QoS flow descriptions.

8.3.2.10 Extended protocol configuration options

This IE is included in the message when the network needs to transmit (protocol) data (e.g. configuration parameters, error codes or messages/events) to the UE.

8.3.2.11 DNN

The IE shall be included in the message when the PDU session is a non-emergency PDU session and the UE is not registered for onboarding services in SNPN.

8.3.2.12 5GSM network feature support

This IE is included when the network needs to indicate support of 5GSM network features.

8.3.2.13 Void

8.3.2.14 Serving PLMN rate control

This IE shall be included when the network needs to indicate the maximum uplink control plane user data the UE is allowed to send per 6 minute interval.

8.3.2.15 ATSSS container

The IE shall be included in the message when the PDU session is an MA PDU session.

8.3.2.16 Control plane only indication

The network shall include the control plane only indication IE if the network determines that the associated PDU session is only for control plane CIoT 5GS optimization.

8.3.2.17 IP header compression configuration

The SMF may include the IP header compression configuration IE if:

- the network accepts an IP PDU session type;

- control plane CIoT 5GS optimization is selected; and

- the UE provided the IP header compression configuration IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message.

8.3.2.18 Ethernet header compression configuration

The SMF may include the Ethernet header compression configuration IE if:

- the network accepts an Ethernet PDU session type;

- control plane CIoT 5GS optimization is selected; and

- the UE provided the Ethernet header compression configuration IE in the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message.

8.3.2.19 Service-level-AA container

The SMF shall include the Service-level-AA container IE if the service-level authentication and authorization procedure is completed successfully by the external DN.

8.3.2.20 Received MBS container

The network shall include this IE if the UE has requested to join one or more MBS sessions.

8.3.3 PDU session establishment reject

8.3.3.1 Message definition

The PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REJECT message is sent by the SMF to the UE in response to PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message and indicates unsuccessful establishment of a PDU session. See table8.3.3.1.1.

Message type: PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REJECT

Significance: dual

Direction: network to UE


8.3.3.2 Back-off timer value

The network may include this IE if the 5GSM cause is not #28 "unknown PDU session type", #39 "reactivation requested", #46 "out of LADN service area", #50 "PDU session type IPv4 only allowed", #51 "PDU session type IPv6 only allowed", #54 "PDU session does not exist",  #57 "PDU session type IPv4v6 only allowed", #58 "PDU session type Unstructured only allowed", #61 "PDU session type Ethernet only allowed", or #68 "not supported SSC mode", to request a minimum time interval before procedure retry is allowed.

8.3.3.3 Allowed SSC mode

This IE is included when the network rejects the PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST with cause #68 "not supported SSC mode.

8.3.3.4 EAP message

This IE is included when the external DN unsuccessfully performed authentication and authorization of the UE using EAP.

8.3.3.4A 5GSM congestion re-attempt indicator

The network may include this IE only if it includes the Back-off timer value IE and the 5GSM cause value is either #67 "insufficient resources for specific slice and DNN" or #69 "insufficient resources for specific slice".

8.3.3.5 Extended protocol configuration options

This IE is included in the message when the network needs to transmit (protocol) data (e.g. configuration parameters, error codes or messages/events) to the UE.

8.3.3.6 Re-attempt indicator

The network may include this IE if the network includes the Back-off timer value IE and the 5GSM cause value is not #26 "insufficient resources", #28 "unknown PDU session type", #39 "reactivation requested", #46 "out of LADN service area", #54 "PDU session does not exist", #67 "insufficient resources for specific slice and DNN", #68 "not supported SSC mode", or #69 "insufficient resources for specific slice".

8.3.3.7 Service-level-AA container

The network shall include this IE if the service-level authentication and authorization procedure has completed unsuccessfully and the 5GSM cause is #29 "user authentication or authorization failed". The network shall include the service-level-AA response if provided by the DN in the service-level-AA container.

8.3.4 PDU session authentication command

8.3.4.1 Message definition

The PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message is sent by the SMF to the UE for authentication of the UE establishing the PDU session or of the UE participating in the PDU session. See table8.3.4.1.1.


8.3.4.2 Extended protocol configuration options

This IE is included in the message when the network needs to transmit (protocol) data (e.g. configuration parameters, error codes or messages/events) to the UE.

NOTE: How the Extended protocol configuration options IE is used by the network and the UE during the PDU session authentication and authorization procedure is not specified in this release of the specification.

8.3.4.3 Remote UE handling information list

The Remote UE handling information list IE is included in the message when the network needs to transmit the EAP message to a 5G ProSe layer-3 remote UE.

8.3.5 PDU session authentication complete

8.3.5.1 Message definition

The PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMPLETE message is sent by the UE to the SMF in response to the PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message and indicates acceptance of the PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMMAND message. See table8.3.5.1.1.

Message type: PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION COMPLETE

Significance: dual

Direction: UE to network

8.3.5.2 Extended protocol configuration options

This IE is included in the message when the UE needs to transmit (protocol) data (e.g. configuration parameters, error codes or messages/events) to the network.

NOTE: How the Extended protocol configuration options IE is used by the network and the UE during the PDU session authentication and authorization procedure is not specified in this release of the specification.

8.3.5.3 Remote UE handling information list

This Remote UE handling information list IE is included in the message when the UE needs to transmit the EAP message to a 5G ProSe layer-3 remote UE.

8.3.6 PDU session authentication result

8.3.6.1 Message definition

The PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION RESULT message is sent by the SMF to the UE for indication of successful result of authentication of the UE participating in the PDU session. See table8.3.6.1.1.

Message type: PDU SESSION AUTHENTICATION RESULT

Significance: dual

Direction: network to UE



NOTE: It is possible for UEs compliant with version 15.2.1 or earlier versions of this specification to send the Mapped EPS bearer contexts IE with IEI of value "7F" for this message.

8.3.7.2 5GSM capability

This IE is included in the message:

1) for a PDN connection established when in S1 mode, after an inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode, if the UE is a UE operating in single-registration mode in a network supporting N26 interface, the UE has not previously successfully performed the UE-requested PDU session modification to provide this capability, and:

a) if the PDU session is of "IPv4", "IPv6", "IPv4v6" or "Ethernet" PDU session type, and the UE supports reflective QoS; or

b) if the PDU session is of "IPv6" or "IPv4v6" PDU session type, and the UE supports multi-homed IPv6 PDU session; or

2) if the UE needs to revoke the previously indicated support of reflective QoS.

8.3.7.3 5GSM cause

This IE is included in the message to indicate the reason for the deletion of one or more non-default QoS rules, QoS flow descriptions or mapped EPS bearer contexts.

8.3.7.4 Maximum number of supported packet filters

This IE shall be included in the message for a PDN connection established when in S1 mode, after an inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode, if the UE is a UE operating in single-registration mode in a network supporting N26 interface, the UE has not previously successfully performed the UE-requested PDU session modification to provide this capability, the PDU session type is "IPv4", "IPv6", "IPv4v6" or "Ethernet", and the UE can support more than 16 packet filters for this PDU session.

8.3.7.5 Always-on PDU session requested

This IE shall be included in the message for a PDN connection established when in S1 mode, after an inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode, if the UE is a UE operating in single-registration mode in a network supporting N26 interface, the UE has not previously successfully performed the UE-requested PDU session modification to provide this capability, and the UE requests the PDU session to be an always-on PDU session in the 5GS.

8.3.7.6 Integrity protection maximum data rate

This IE shall be included in the message for a PDN connection established when in S1 mode, after an inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode, if the UE is a UE operating in single-registration mode in a network supporting N26 interface, and the UE has not previously successfully performed the UE-requested PDU session modification to provide this capability.

8.3.7.7 Requested QoS rules

This IE is included in the message when the UE requests a specific QoS handling.

8.3.7.8 Requested QoS flow descriptions

This IE is included in the message when the UE requests a specific QoS flow descriptions.

8.3.7.9 Extended protocol configuration options

This IE is included in the message when the UE needs to transmit (protocol) data (e.g. configuration parameters, error codes or messages/events) to the network.

8.3.7.10 Mapped EPS bearer contexts

This IE is included when the UE requests to delete one or more mapped EPS bearer contexts.

8.3.7.11 Port management information container

This IE shall be included when the UE needs to convey a port management information container.

8.3.7.12 IP header compression configuration

This IE is included in the message:

a) if the UE wishes to re-negotiate IP header compression configuration associated to a PDU session and both the UE and the network supports Control plane CIoT 5GS optimization and IP header compression; or

b) to negotiate IP header compression configuration associated to a PDU session after an inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode when both the UE and the network support control plane CIoT 5GS optimization and IP header compression, and the UE is operating in single-registration mode in the network supporting N26 interface.

8.3.7.13 Ethernet header compression configuration

This IE is included in the message:

a) if the UE wishes to re-negotiate Ethernet header compression configuration associated to a PDU session and both the UE and the network support Control plane CIoT 5GS optimization and Ethernet header compression; or

b) to negotiate Ethernet header compression configuration associated to a PDU session after an inter-system change from S1 mode to N1 mode.

8.3.7.14 Requested MBS container

This IE is included in the message when the UE requests to join or leave one or more MBS sessions that are associated with the PDU session.

8.3.7.15 Service-level-AA container

This IE shall be included in the message when the UE needs to modify an established PDU session for C2 communication.

8.3.8 PDU session modification reject

8.3.8.1 Message definition

The PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REJECT message is sent by the SMF to the UE to indicate rejection of the PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REQUEST. See table8.3.8.1.1.

Message type: PDU SESSION MODIFICATION REJECT

Significance: dual

Direction: network to UE


If the payload container type is set to "N1 SM information" and is included in the UL NAS TRANSPORT or DL NAS TRANSPORT message, the payload container contents contain a 5GSM message as defined in subclause8.3.



If the payload container type is set to "SOR transparent container" and is included in the DL NAS TRANSPORT message, the payload container contents are coded the same way as the contents of the SOR transparent container IE (see subclause9.11.3.51) for SOR data type is set to value "0" except that the first three octets are not included.



If the payload container type is set to "SOR transparent container" and is included in the UL NAS TRANSPORT message, the payload container contents are coded the same way as the contents of the SOR transparent container IE (see subclause9.11.3.51) for SOR data type is set to value "1" except that the first three octets are not included.



If the payload container type is set to "UE policy container" and is included in the DL NAS TRANSPORT, UL NAS TRANSPORT or REGISTRATION REQUEST message, the payload container contents are coded as defined in subclauseAnnexD.



If the payload container type is set to "UE parameters update transparent container" and is included in the DL NAS TRANSPORT message, the payload container contents are coded the same way as the contents of the UE parameters update transparent container IE (see subclause9.11.3.53A) for UE parameters update data type is set to value "0" except that the first three octets are not included.



If the payload container type is set to "UE parameters update transparent container" and is included in the UL NAS TRANSPORT message, the payload container contents are coded the same way as the contents of the UE parameters update transparent container IE (see subclause9.11.3.53A) for UE parameters update data type is set to value "1" except that the first three octets are not included.



If the payload container type is set to "SMS" and is included in the UL NAS TRANSPORT or DL NAS TRANSPORT message, the payload container contents contain an SMS message (i.e. CP-DATA, CP-ACK or CP-ERROR) as defined in subclause7.2 in 3GPPTS24.011[13].



If the payload container type is set to "CIoT user data container" and is included in the UL NAS TRANSPORT, DL NAS TRANSPORT or CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message, the payload container contents are coded the same way as the contents of the user data container IE (see subclause9.9.4.24 in 3GPPTS24.301[15]) except that the first three octets are not included.



If the payload container type is set to "SMS" and is included in the CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message, the payload container contents are coded the same way as the contents of the NAS message container IE (see subclause9.9.3.22 in 3GPPTS24.301[15]) except that the first two octets are not included.



If the payload container type is set to "Location services message container" and is included in the UL NAS TRANSPORT, DL NAS TRANSPORT or CONTROL PLANE SERVICE REQUEST message, the payload container contents include location services message payload.



If the payload container type is set to "LTE Positioning Protocol (LPP) message container" and is included in the UL NAS TRANSPORT or DL NAS TRANSPORT message, the payload container contents include LPP message payload.



If the payload container type is set to "Service-level-AA container" and is included in the UL NAS TRANSPORT or DL NAS TRANSPORT message, the payload container contents are coded the same way as the contents of service-level-AA container (see subclause9.11.2.10).



If the payload container type is set to "Event notification", the payload container contents include one or more event notification indicators.


